The GALE

ENCYCLOPEDIA of

Psychology
SECOND EDITION

The GALE

ENCYCLOPEDIA of

P sychology
SECOND EDITION

BONNIE STRICKLAND, EXECUTIVE EDITOR

Gale
Encyclopedia
of Psychology
Second Edition

Bonnie R. Strickland, Executive editor
GALE GROUP STAFF

Kristine Krapp, Coordinating senior editor
Christine Jeryan, Managing editor
Melissa C. McDade, Assistant editor
Deirdre Blanchfield, Assistant editor
Mark Springer, Editorial Technical Trainer
Barbara J. Yarrow, Manager, Multimedia and imaging
content
Robyn V. Young, Senior editor, Imaging acquisitions
Robert Duncan, Senior imaging specialist
Kenn Zorn, Product design manager
Marie Claire Krzewinski, Cover design
Marie Claire Krzewinski and Michelle DiMercurio,
Page design
Mike Logusz, Graphic artist
Mary Beth Trimper, Manager, Composition and
electronic prepress
Evi Seoud, Assistant manager, Composition and
electronic prepress
Stacy L. Melson, Buyer
Tables by Mark Berger, Standley Publishing, Ferndale,
Michigan
First Edition by Eastword Publication Development,
Pepper Pike, Ohio

While every effort has been made to ensure the reliability of the information presented in this publication, Gale Group does not guarantee
the accuracy of the data contained herein. Gale accepts no payment for
listing; and inclusion in the publication of any organization, agency, institution, publication, service, or individual does not imply endorsement of the editors or publisher. Errors brought to the attention of the
publisher and verified to the satisfaction of the publisher will be corrected in future editions.
This publication is a creative work fully protected by all applicable
copyright laws, as well as by misappropriation, trade secret, unfair competition, and other applicable laws. The authors and editors of this work
have added value to the underlying factual material herein through one
or more of the following: unique and original selection, coordination,
expression, arrangement, and classification of the information.
All rights to this publication will be vigorously defended.
Copyright 2001
Gale Group
27500 Drake Rd.
Farmington Hills, MI 48331-3535
All rights reserved, including the right of reproduction in whole or in
part in any form.
ISBN 0-7876-4786-1
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
The Gale encyclopedia of psychology / Bonnie R. Strickland,
executive editor.–2nd ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-7876-4786-1
1. Psychology–Encyclopedias. I. Strickland, Bonnie R.
BF31.G35 2000
150’.3–dc21
00-34736

EDITORS AND CONTRIBUTORS

EXECUTIVE EDITOR
Bonnie Ruth Strickland, Ph.D
Professor of Psychology
University of Massachusetts/Amherst
COORDINATING EDITOR

Kristine M. Krapp
CONTRIBUTORS

Margaret Alic
Doreen Arcus
Howard Baker
Bernard Beins
Karen L. Bierman
Hallie Bourne
James Calland
Kenneth Chiacchia
Dianne Daeg de Mott
Jill De Villiers
Marie Doorey
Catherine Dybiec Holm
Lindsay Evans
Alan Feldman
Paula Ford-Martin

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Susan Gall
Lauri R. Harding
Jim Henry
D. George Joseph
Jerome Kagan
Kyung Lim Kalasky
Mary Anne Klasen
Judson Knight
Peter LaFreniere
Johnna Laird
Lara Lynn Lane
Patricia Martin
Mary McNulty
George A. Milite
Zoran Minderovic
Nancy Moore
Timothy E. Moore
Patricia Skinner
Gail B. Slap
Jane Spear
Laurence Steinberg
Judith Turner
Cindy Washabaugh
Janet A. Welsh
Rosalie Wieder
Angela Woodward

V

ABOUT THE ENCYCLOPEDIA

The Gale Encyclopedia of Psychology, Second Edition includes over 650 entries on people and subjects important to the study of psychology. This number represents one-third more entries than the first edition. The
book has been designed so the reader can easily find and
access the information needed.

• Bolded cross-references direct the reader to entries
on terms mentioned in the text of other entries.
• See also references at the end of entries point the
reader to related entries.

• Entries are alphabetically arranged.

• Further Reading and Further Information sections
follow entries, directing the reader to other sources
of information on the topic.

• Length of entries ranges from brief explanations of
a concept in one or two paragraphs to longer, more
detailed entries on more complex topics. Almost
65% of the entries are entirely new or updated
from the first edition.

• A new and improved glossary of over 350 essential
terms is included to help the reader understand key
concepts.

• A brief definition of the entry term appears between the entry title and the full text of the entry.

• An updated appendix lists psychological organizations that the reader may contact for further inquiries.

• Over 175 photos, illustrations, and tables accompany the text and enhance the reader’s understanding of the subject covered.

• An updated and expanded general subject index
points the reader to concepts and people covered in
the encyclopedia.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

VII

CONTENTS

Editors and Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
About the Encyclopedia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
Table of Contents. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ix
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
Entries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 675
Psychological Organizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 687
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 691

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

IX

INTRODUCTION

Psychology is one of the most fascinating fields of
study. Almost everyone seems interested in understanding his or her own behavior, as well as the actions of others. Psychology is, by far, the most popular of the social
and behavioral sciences and one of the most attractive to
those who are interested in knowing more about people
and their behavior. In college and universities, psychology has been one of the most popular majors for over
three decades, and students are more likely to take an
elective course in psychology than one from any other
field. Not surprisingly, psychology has also become a
popular high school offering.
Initially, psychology courses at the secondary school
level tried to meet the needs of rapidly maturing adolescents who were interested in the changes they were experiencing in themselves and in their relationships with others—family, friends, the world of adults. We are living in
times of dramatic social change. Each of us continually
faces new challenges about how we will make our place in
the world. As the discipline of psychology matured, adjustment courses gave way to substantive content courses
that offered not just psychology’s latest findings about developmental and identity issues, but also featured those
more traditional areas of cognitive, experimental, physiological, and social psychology. These courses were joined
by newly developed offerings such as neuropsychology
and psycholinguistics. The advances in the scientific side
of psychology were paralleled by the remarkable growth
of counseling, clinical, and school psychology.
To keep up with the rapidly expanding field, the
newly revised second edition of the Gale Encyclopedia
of Psychology has added about a third more entries and
biographies. Coverage includes the key concepts on
which the science is built, as well as major theoretical
advances in psychology. Clinical information is broadly
covered, noting the various psychological theories and
techniques currently in use and the scientific evidence
that supports then. Biographical profiles of major figures
in the field of psychology are included, ranging from the
earliest historical pioneers to current clinicians.

Psychology is one of our youngest sciences. People
first looked at the stars to predict and control their destiny and the science of astronomy was born. Mathematics was necessary to count and measure, and eventually
the physical sciences, such as physics, chemistry, and biology, emerged. The study of human psychology, however, developed later. It has only been a bit over a century since scientists and philosophers turned their eyes
from the planets to people and tried to understand human
behavior in a systematic, scientific way. In the late l9th
century, philosophers and physiologists began to examine the ways people perceive and interact with the world
around them. How do individuals use their senses of
sight, hearing, and touch to make sense of the world?
How do people remember what has happened to them or
know how to plan for the future?
In the late second half of the 1800s, a number of
young North American men and a few women traveled
to Germany to study with Wilhelm Wundt, who had established a laboratory and the first graduate program of
study in psychology at the University of Leipzig in Germany. They returned to teach psychology and train other
students in the major universities of this country with the
intent of quantifying individual differences and important elements of human perception and memory.
About the same time (1896), Lightner Witmer established a Psychological Clinic at the University of Pennsylvania to help children who were having difficulty in
school.
Being a psychologist, he assumed that his new profession—dedicated to learning and memory—would
help him assist children who were having trouble reading, writing, spelling, and remembering information.
Unfortunately, Witmer could find no help from the complex, theoretical notions within the experimental laboratories, and he turned to schoolteachers and social workers for practical advice.
Thus began the long struggle between the scientific
study and practice of psychology, theory and action. Sci-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

XI

entists want to know that the data that they gather in their
experiments are valid and replicable (that is, others pursuing the same questions with appropriate methods
would find the same results). They sometimes feel that
clinicians, for example, use psychotherapy techniques
that have not been proven to be useful and may even be
harmful. Practitioners, on the other hand, faced with
pressing and immediate problems of clients who are anxious, depressed, or psychotic, need immediate treatments
to relieve suffering and may use methods that have not
have been fully proven in the laboratories.
The earliest psychologists worked primarily with children, usually those who were delinquent or having trouble
in school. They were particularly taken with assessing intelligence and translated a test developed by a Frenchman,
Alfred Binet, to quantify “mental age.” Unfortunately, they
moved well beyond the limitations of the test that had been
designed to identify children who were having trouble in
school. They began testing soldiers recruited for the First
World War and immigrants who wanted to come to this
country. According to their tests, they found almost half of
the young, white male recruits and some 80% of Eastern
European immigrants to be “morons.” This led them to rethink the uses of intelligence tests, especially because of
opinions like that of journalist Walter Lippman, who recommended that the “intelligence testers and their tests
should be sunk without warning in the… sea.” But serious
harm had been done. Some six million immigrants were
denied entrance into this country, and intelligence testing
laid the base for human eugenics laws that allowed individuals who were found “intellectually unfit” to be sterilized.
Nonetheless, psychology became something of a national mania in the 1920s. With the introduction of psychoanalysis into this country, people wanted to “adjust”
through self-examination and the probing of the unconscious. The scientific psychologists were dismayed at the
excesses of pseudopsychologists, whose ranks included
mind readers and charlatans. Psychological clinicians
were concerned as well and took steps to develop a standard of ethics and ways of identifying appropriately
trained psychologists.
With the advent of the Second World War, psychologists joined the military effort and were surprised themselves by how much they had to offer. Human factors psychologists designed airplane cockpits and the lighting on
runways that we still use today. Gestalt psychologists
taught American citizens how to identify enemy planes
should they fly overhead. B.F. Skinner taught pigeons to
guide missiles toward enemy targets. Psychologists
worked for the Office of Strategic Services (which eventually became the CIA) to develop propaganda and disinformation. This group also developed assessments to deterXII

mine who might be good officers (or spies). On the battlefield, clinicians were helping troops who were experiencing “traumatic neurosis, ” originally called “shell shock”
in the First World War and now known as post-traumatic
stress disorder. When the soldiers returned home, they led
therapy groups for wounded military personnel.
At the end of the Second World War, the National Research Council urged the American Psychological Association (APA) to heal the schism between scientists and
clinicians and reorganize with full membership benefits
for all doctoral psychologists. The Veteran’s Hospitals, in
particular, needed well-trained personnel to provide mental health services for their patients. A major 1949 conference held in Boulder, Colorado established standards of
education and training for clinical psychologists. Their
recommendations were that clinical psychologists should
be trained as generalists who were both scientists and clinicians. Doctoral students would complete at least a year of
internship and receive the Ph. D. (doctor of philosophy)
degree. These standards are still in place today, although
newer of training are available for students who want to
place more emphasis on practice and less on doing research. In addition to university graduate programs, a
large number of professional schools have been established, often offering a Psy. D (doctor of psychology) degree. Currently, some 4,000 students graduate each year
with a doctoral degree in psychology and perhaps three
times that many receive a master’s degree. The overwhelming majority of these graduates go into clinical or
applied work, although changing conditions in the health
fields, such as the growth of HMOs, have raised concerns
about job opportunities for clinical psychologists.
A field as broad as psychology, which stretches from
the study of brain cells to that of prison cells, is an active,
argumentative, and exciting adventure that offers opportunities in science, practice, and social policy. Most of the
pressing economic and social issues of our generation,
such as the environment, health needs, poverty, and violence, will only be alleviated if we understand the ways in
which people create or creatively solve the problems that
we bring upon ourselves. The student who is interested in
unraveling the secrets of the human brain to see the mind
at work, who is fascinated about how children grow up
and become competent adults, who is dedicated to bringing people together to resolve conflict, who is committed
to helping people with physical, emotional, or behavioral
difficulties, or who is challenged by the desire to develop
social policy in the public interest is welcomed in psychology. We hope this encyclopedia will provide useful
information that will help students and others understand
this fascinating field and its opportunities.
Bonnie R. Strickland, Ph.D.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Bonnie Ruth Strickland received her Ph.D. in Clinical Psychology from The Ohio State University in 1962.
She has been on the faculties of Emory University and the
University of Massachusetts in Amherst as a teacher, researcher, administrator, clinician, and consultant. A
Diplomate in Clinical Psychology, she has also been in
practice for over 35 years. Dr. Strickland has served as

President of the American Psychological Association, the
Division of Clinical Psychology and the American Association for Applied and Preventive Psychology; she was a
Founder and on the first Board of Directors of the American Psychological Society. An advocate for minority concerns, she has published more than a hundred scholarly
works including two Citation Classics in psychology.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

XIII

A
Ability

Abnormal psychology

Knowledge or skill, including the potential to acquire knowledge or skills and those already acquired.

The subfield of psychology concerned with the
study of abnormal behavior.

The capacity to learn, commonly known as aptitude,
and the demonstration of skills and knowledge already
learned, called achievement, are among the factors used
to evaluate intelligence. When evaluating or comparing
subjects, two kinds of abilities are considered: verbal
ability, including reading comprehension, ability to converse, vocabulary, and the use of language; and problemsolving ability, which includes a person’s capacity to
make good decisions given a set of circumstances.
Relatively straightforward tests of ability are often
used by employers to determine an applicant’s skills. For
example, a person applying for a job as a word processor
may be given a keyboarding test, while a bus-driving applicant would be given a driving test. Tests to evaluate
more complex abilities, such as leadership, motivation,
and social skills tend to be less precise.
Developed around the turn of the twentieth century,
formal tests used by psychologists and educators to measure aptitude and achievement remain controversial. Intelligence, or IQ, tests are faulted for ignoring cultural or
social biases, particularly with regard to schoolchildren,
and critics contend such standardized measures cannot
adequately predict a person’s future performance.
See also Achievement tests; Scholastic Assessment
Test; Stanford-Binet intelligence scales; Vocational Aptitude Test
Further Reading
Atkinson, Rita L.; Richard C. Atkinson; Edward E. Smith; and
Ernest R. Hilgard. Introduction to Psychology. 9th ed. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. 12th ed. Glenview,
IL: Scott, Foresman, 1988.

Abnormal behavior is defined as behavior that is
considered to be maladaptive or deviant by the social
culture in which it occurs. Though disagreement exists
regarding which particular behaviors can be classified as
abnormal, psychologists have defined several criteria for
purposes of classification. One is that the behavior occurs infrequently and thus deviates from statistical
norms. Another is that the behavior deviates from social
norms of acceptable behavior. A third is that the behavior
is maladaptive, that it has adverse affects on the individual or on the individual’s social group. Lastly, abnormality may be defined based on the subjective feelings of
misery, depression, or anxiety of an individual rather
than any behavior he exhibits.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 4th edition (DSM-IV), is a classification system of abnormal behaviors which aids psychologists and
other mental health professionals in diagnosing and
treating mental disorders. DSM-IV includes the major categories of abnormal behavior which are anxiety disorders, such as obsessive-compulsive disorders and phobias; affective disorders, which are disturbances of mood
such as depression; schizophrenic disorders, which are
characterized by major disturbances in personality and
distortion of reality; and various personality disorders.
While psychologists use similar criteria to diagnose
abnormal behavior, their perspectives in understanding
and treating related disorders vary greatly. For instance,
a psychologist with a psychoanalytic approach would explain depression as a reaction to loss, worsened by anger
turned inward. A behavioral psychologist would assume
a lack of positive reinforcement to be a significant cause
in the disease. A cognitive theorist would focus on the
negative thought patterns and attitudes of an individual

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

1

Abortion

in contributing to his depression. And a psychologist
with a biological perspective would consider a chemical
imbalance in the nervous system of a depressed individual to be responsible for his disorder. Many studies have
shown that a number of these factors may come into play
in the life of an individual suffering from a mental disorder characterized by abnormal behavior.
See also Mental illness; Psychotic disorders
Further Reading
Oldham, John M. The New Personality Self-Portrait. New
York: Bantam, 1995.
Personality Disorders and the Five-Factor Model of Personality.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association,
1994.

Abortion
Invasive procedure resulting in pregnancy termination and death of the fetus.

Abortion is the final consequence of a woman’s decision to terminate her pregnancy. In the U.S., more than
50% of the pregnancies are unintended, and 50% of these
end in abortion. More than half (53%) of the unplanned
pregnancies happen among the 10% of women who practice no contraception. Most women getting abortions are
young: 55% are under 25, including 21% teenagers.

Vagina

Vulsellum

While abortion is practiced throughout society, in all
socioeconomic strata, poor women are three times more
likely to have an abortion than their well-off counterparts.
White women have 63% of all abortions, but the
non-white abortion rate is more than twice the white
rate—54 per 1,000 versus 20 per 1,000. About 93% of
all abortions are performed for social, not medical, reasons; in other words, most abortions are, from the medical point of view, unnecessary: the mother’s health and
life are not in jeopardy, and there are no abnormalities
which would justify the termination of the fetus’s life.
Social reasons include fear of motherhood, fear of losing a partner who doesn’t want children, fear of parental
and social disapproval, financial difficulties, lack of support, and psychological problems, among others.
Abortion is a complex issue that raises a plethora of
medical, ethical, political, legal, and psychological questions, and is viewed by proponents and opponents as one
of society’s fundamental problems. “Abortion,” Paul D.
Simmons has written (Butler and Walbert, 1992), “is related to life and death, sexuality and procreation—all of
which are integrally related in the human psyche.” While
the “pro-choice” camp defends a woman’s right to terminate her pregnancy, “pro-life” forces define abortion as
murder. As commentators have noted, dialogue between
the two camps has been difficult, seemingly impossible,
because opinions are often based on strong feelings and
beliefs. An additional obstacle to dialogue is the fact that
the two opposing sides use fundamentally different discourses. Pro-life discourse often draws its strength from
the Christian axiom about the sanctity of life, while prochoice thinking proceeds from the belief that an individual woman has the freedom to act in her best interest.
While vulnerable to moral condemnation, and even harassment, adult women have the protection of liberal legislation in seeking an abortion (in Roe v. Wade, 1973, the U.S.
Supreme Court ruled that abortion is a constitutional right).
Teenagers, however, are subject to state laws; in 25 states, a
minor cannot seek an abortion without parental consent. Traditionally, any medical treatment of a minor requires
parental consent, and as the Planned Parenthood Fact Sheet
“Teenagers, Abortion, and Government Intrusion Laws”
points out, a physician treating a minor without parental consent is committing the common law equivalent of battery.
However, “in the area of abortion, there have never been
criminal penalties for treating a minor on her own consent.”

Uterus

Embryonic
tissue

Speculum
Extraction tube
Cervix

Zoran Minderovic
Between five and seven weeks, a pregnancy can be ended
by a procedure called menstrual extraction, shown above.
(Electronic Illustrations Group. Reproduced with permission.)

2

Further Reading
Butler, J. Douglas, and David F. Walbert, eds. Abortion, Medicine,
and the Law. 4th rev. ed. New York: Facts On File, 1992.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

but on a subsequent occasion, may detect it. In addition,
scientists cannot determine with absolute certainty how
much energy is present in a light because of limits to the
physics of measurement. As a result, psychologists
often define the threshold as the lowest intensity that a
person can detect 50 percent of the time.
A number of different factors can influence the absolute threshold, including the observer’s motivations
and expectations, and whether the person is adapted to
the stimulus. Scientists have discovered that cognitive
processes can influence the measurement of the threshold and that it is not as simple as once understood. Psychologists have also studied how different two stimuli
have to be in order to be noticed as not being the same.
Such an approach involves what are called difference
thresholds.
Further Reading
Galantner, E. “Contemporary Psychophysics.” In New Directions in Psychology, edited by R. Brown. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston, 1962.

Absolute threshold
The minimal amount of energy necessary to stimulate the sensory receptors.

The method of testing for the absolute threshold is
similar for different sensory systems. Thus, the tester can
briefly present a light or a sound (or any other kind of
stimulus) at different, low intensities until the observer is
unable to detect the presence of the stimulus. In such a
task, the person may undergo thousands of trials before
the researcher can determine the threshold.
While the absolute threshold is a useful concept, it
does not exist in reality. That is, on one occasion, an individual might be unable to detect a certain faint light

Acculturation
The process of adapting to or adopting the practices of a culture different from one’s own.

Acculturation is the process of learning about and
adapting to a new culture. A new culture may require adjustments in all or some of the aspects of daily living, including language, work, shopping, housing, children’s
schooling, health care, recreation, and social life. Relo-

EXAMPLES OF ABSOLUTE THRESHOLDS
Sense

Example of threshold

Vision

The amount of light present if someone held up a single candle 30 mi (48 km) away from us, if our
eyes were used to the dark. If a person in front of you held up a candle and began backing up at the
rate of one foot (30 cm) per second, that person would have to back up for 44 hours before the
flame became invisible.

Hearing

The ticking of a watch in a quiet environment at 20 ft (6 m).

Taste

One drop on quinine sulfate (a bitter substance) in 250 gal (946 l) of water. Quinine is one of the
components of tonic water.

Smell

One drop of perfume in a six-room house. This value will change depending on the type of substance we are smelling.

Touch

The force exerted by dropping the wing of a bee onto your cheek from a distance of one centimeter
(0.5 in). This value will vary considerably depending on the part of the body involved.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

3

Acculturation

Darroch Forrest, Jacqueline, and Jennifer J. Frost. “The Family
Planning Attitudes and Experiences of Low-Income
Women.” Family Planning Perspectives 28, no. 6. (November-December 1996): 246-55.
Hern, Warren M. Abortion Practice. Philadelphia: J. B. Lippincott, 1984.
Matthews, Stephen, David Ribar, and Mark Wilhelm. “The Effects of Economic Conditions and Access to Reproductive
Health Services on State Abortion Rates and Birthrates.”
Family Planning Perspectives 29, no. 2. (March-April
1997): 52-60.
“Teenagers, Abortion, and Government Intrusion Laws.”
(Planned Parenthood Fact Sheet). New York: Planned Parenthood Federation of America, October 1992.
Torres, Aida, and Jacqueline Darroch Forrest. “Why Do
Women Have Abortions?” Family Planning Perspectives
20, no. 4. (July-August 1988).

Achievement motivation

cation to a society that is similar to one’s own requires
less acculturation than moving to a society where cultural norms are unfamiliar. For example, moving to a society where women’s roles are different from those of
one’s home culture can cause feelings of isolation and
confusion for the adult women of the family.
Acculturation is different in subtle ways from assimilation: assimilation involves being absorbed into the
new culture. A popular metaphor for this process was introduced in 1908 by the playwright Israel Zangwill with
his work, The Melting Pot. Acculturation, on the other
hand, is the process of learning the practices and customs of a new culture. People can assimilate without
being acculturated. The distinctively dressed Hasidim of
Brooklyn or the Mormons of Utah are not completely acculturated to contemporary American society, but they
are assimilated. Understanding the distinction between
acculturation and assimilation is important for public
policy and for society’s ability to grow and function
smoothly.
A homogeneous consumer culture worldwide has
changed the nature of acculturation. People all over the
globe watch the same news reports on CNN, rent the
same movies, watch the same television programs, eat
the same pizzas and burgers from fast food franchises,
and many of the world’s families have made at least one
visit to a Disney theme park. Immigrants to a new country may already be very familiar with the customs and
lifestyle of their new home.

Cultural pluralism and multiculturalism
American sociologist Horace Kallen argues that it is
unrealistic and counterproductive to force new immigrants to abandon their familiar, lifelong cultural attributes when they arrive in the United States. Instead of the
concept of the “melting pot,” Kallen prescribed what he
called “cultural pluralism.” Cultural pluralism views
U.S. society as a federation rather than a union. Sometimes referred to as multiculturalism, this approach suggests that each group of ethnic Americans has rights,
such as representation in government according to their
percentage of the total population, and the right to speak
and work in their native language. However, English-language culture and social influences continue to dominate, but African American, Hispanic, Jewish, Italian,
Asian, and other ethnic influences are certainly apparent.
Further Reading
Gordon, Milton Myron. Assimilation in American Life: The
Role of Race, Religion, and National Origins. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1964.
Jacobson, Adam R. “Changing With the Times.” Hispanic 7,
(March 1994): 20+.
4

Portes, Alejandro and Min Zhou. “Should Immigrants Assimilate?” The Public Interest, (Summer 1994): 18+.
Richey, Marilyn. “Global Families: Surviving an Overseas
Move.” Management Review 85, (June 1996): 57+.
Salins, Peter D. Assimilation, American Style. New York: Basic
Books, 1997.

Achievement motivation
See Motivation

Achievement tests
Standardized tests, administered to groups of students, intended to measure how well they have
learned information in various academic subjects.

Spelling tests, timed arithmetic tests, and map
quizzes are all examples of achievement tests. Each measures how well students can demonstrate their knowledge
of a particular academic subject or skill. Achievement
tests on a small scale like these are administered frequently in schools. Less frequently, students are given more inclusive achievement tests that cover a broader spectrum of
information and skills. For instance, many states now require acceptable scores on “proficiency” tests at various
grade levels before advancement is allowed. Admission to
colleges and graduate studies depends on achievement
tests such as the Scholastic Assessment Test (SAT),
which attempts to measure both aptitude and achievement,
the Graduate Record Exam (GRE), the Law School Admissions Test (LSAT), and the Medical College Admissions Test (MCAT). The Iowa Test of Basic Skills (ITBS)
and the California Achievement Test (CAT) are examples
of achievement tests given to many elementary school students around the United States.
Useful achievement tests must be both reliable and
valid. Reliable tests are consistent and reproducible. That
is, a student taking a similar test, or the same test at a different time, must respond with a similar performance.
Valid tests measure achievement on the subject they are
intended to measure. For example, a test intended to measure achievement in arithmetic—but filled with difficult
vocabulary—may not measure arithmetic achievement at
all. The students who score well on such a test may be
those who have good vocabularies or above-average reading ability in addition to appropriate arithmetic skills.
Students who fail may have achieved the same arithmetic
skills, but did not know how to demonstrate them. Such

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Many researchers point to another problem with
achievement tests. Because it is difficult to distinguish in
test form the difference between aptitude—innate ability—and achievement—learned knowledge or skills—the
results of tests that purport to measure achievement
alone are necessarily invalid to some degree. Also, some
children attain knowledge through their experiences,
which may assist them in tests of academic achievement.
The presence of cultural biases in achievement tests is a
frequent topic of discussion among educators, psychologists, and the public at large. Political pressure to produce high scores and the linking of achievement to public funds for schools have also become part of the
achievement-test controversy.
Yet further skepticism about achievement test results
comes from critics who contend that teachers frequently
plan their lessons and teaching techniques to foster success on such tests. This “teaching to the test” technique
used by some teachers makes comparisons with other
curricula difficult; thus, test scores resulting from the
different methods become questionable as well. Test
anxiety may also create unreliable results. Students who
experience excessive anxiety when taking tests may perform below their level of achievement. For them,
achievement tests may prove little more than their aversion to test-taking.

macist David Ackerman and Bertha (Greenberg) Ackerman. They came to the United States in 1912, and were
naturalized in 1920. He was married to Gwendolyn Hill
on October 10, 1937. They had two daughters, Jeanne
and Deborah.
Ackerman attended a public school in New York
City. In 1929 he was awarded a B.A. from Columbia
University, and in 1933 earned his M.D. from the same
university. After a short spell (1933–34) as an intern at
the Montefiore Hospital in New York, he interned at the
Menninger Clinic and Sanitorium in Topeka, Kansas. He
joined their psychiatric staff in 1935.
He assumed the post of chief psychiatrist at the
Menninger Child Guidance Clinic in 1937. For the next
fourteen years, Ackerman was also chief psychiatrist to
the Jewish Board of Guardians in New York City. During
this period, he had numerous positions at a variety of institutions in New York City. Ackerman acted as psychiatrist to the Red Cross Rehabilitation Clinic during World
War II, and also worked as a consultant to the department of scientific research when it was first established
by Max Horkheimer in 1944. After the war, Ackerman
assumed the post of clinical professor of psychiatry at
Columbia University, and later lectured at the New York
School of Social Work, a part of Columbia University.
He also lectured (1944–48) at the Visiting Nurse Service
and the Community Service Society.
In addition to his active career in New York City,
Ackerman served as visiting professor of psychiatry for
a number of universities, including Tulane University
and the University of North Carolina. In 1952 Ackerman
served as a member of the White House Conference on
Children in Washington D.C.

Further Reading
Houts, Paul L., ed. The Myth of Measurability. New York: Hart
Publishing Co., 1977.
Wallace, Betty, and William Graves. Poisoned Apple: The BellCurve Crisis and How Schools Create Mediocrity and
Failure. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1995.

Pioneers field of family psychology

1908-1971
Psychologist and educator noted for his work as a
family therapist, particularly for his ability to look
beyond the traditional assessment of families and
to accurately assess the way that family members
relate to each other.

Ackerman published The Unity of the Family and
Family Diagnosis: An Approach to the Preschool Child in
1938, both of which contributed to the initial promotion
of the theory of family therapy. In 1950 Ackerman
wrote a book on anti-Semitism in collaboration with
Marie Jahoda. Sponsored by the American Jewish Committee, Anti-Semitism and Emotional Disorder, a Psychoanalytic Interpretation examines and analyzes the phenomenon and offers possible solutions. He went on to
write many books during his career, including The Psychodynamics of Family Life (1958) and Treating the Troubled Family (1966). He coauthored several books, including Exploring the Base for Family Therapy and published
more than 100 articles in professional journals.

Nathan Ward Ackerman was born in Bessarabia,
Russia on November 22, 1908. His parents were phar-

Ackerman is widely acknowledged as a pioneer in
his field and credited with developing the concept of
family psychology. In 1955 he was the first to initiate a

Nathan Ward Ackerman

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

5

Nathan Ward Ackerman

tests would not be considered valid. In order for reliable
comparisons to be made, all standardized tests, including
achievement tests, must be given under similar conditions
and with similar time limitations and scoring procedures.
The difficulty of maintaining consistency in these administration procedures makes the reliability of such tests
questionable, critics contend.

Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS)

debate on family therapy at a meeting of the American
Orthopsychiatric Association, with the intention of opening lines of communication in this new branch of psychiatry. He believed that the mental or physical disposition
of one family member would affect other family members, and that often the best way to treat the individual
was to treat the family as a whole. In fact he was a very
strong advocate of treating the whole family in order to
solve the problems of the individual. He devoted most of
his career to family psychotherapy.
Ackerman’s work was deeply appreciated by his
peers, as evidenced by the number of awards bestowed
upon him. He received the Rudolph Meyer award from
the Association for Improvement to Mental Health in
1959. He was also the recipient of the Wilfred Hulse
award for group psychotherapy in 1965.

Founds institute to study the family
In 1960, Ackerman opened the Institute for Family
Studies and Treatment, a nonprofit organization devoted
to promoting family mental health. The Institute’s
premise was (and is) that if the family is healthy, the individual will be healthy and ultimately produce a healthier society. Ackerman developed a program for research
that greatly furthered the effectiveness of the Institute.
He served as the director of this establishment up
until his death, when it was renamed the Nathan W. Ackerman Institute (usually known as the Ackerman Institute) in his honor. The Institute has its own journal, Family Process, which was the first ever family therapy journal, started by Ackerman in association with Don Jackson. This journal remains a principal reference for other
professionals in the field. Today the Ackerman Institute
is considered perhaps the finest facility for family psychology in the world.
In addition to being a fellow of the American Board
of Psychiatry and the New York Academy of Medicine,
Ackerman was also president (1957–59) of the Association of Psychoanalytic Medicine, as well as a member of
the Academy of Child Psychiatry, the American Psychopathalogical Society, and the New York Council of
Child Psychiatry.
Ackerman died on June 12, 1971, and was buried in
Westchester Hills Cemetery, Hastings on Hudson, New
York.
Patricia Skinner

Further Reading
Ackerman Institute www.ackerman.org.
6

Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome (AIDS)
A progressive, degenerative disease involving several major organ systems, including the immune
system and central nervous system. Uniformly
fatal, it is associated with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), a viral infection that progressively
weakens the immune system.

Since Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
(AIDS) manifests itself in a number of different diseases
and conditions, it has been difficult to arrive at a formal
definition. In an attempt to standardize the definition of
AIDS, the Centers for Disease Control in 1992 included
among its diagnostic criteria a count of 200 or fewer
CD4T lymphocyte cells per cubic ml of blood (a sign of
severe immune system suppression). AIDS was first recognized in 1981 as a cluster of symptoms in homosexual
men in New York City and San Francisco. Eventually,
similar symptoms were found among intravenous drug
users, hemophiliacs, and other recipients of blood transfusions. In 1984, the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) was isolated and subsequently determined as the
probable cause of AIDS.
HIV is transmitted through sexual intercourse, contact with infected blood and blood products, and the
birth process. However, casual social contact—even if
close and prolonged—has not been found to spread HIV.
The greatest number of HIV cases are sexually transmitted, through both homosexual and heterosexual intercourse. Screening of donated blood and blood products
since 1985 has drastically reduced the risk of transfusion-related HIV. Children may be infected in utero or
by exposure to blood and vaginal secretions during
childbirth. The child of an infected mother has a 25 to 35
percent chance of acquiring the virus.
Persons infected with HIV initially show no symptoms. Within three to six weeks after infection they may
exhibit flu-like symptoms that last up to three weeks and
resolve spontaneously. According to long-term studies,
all or almost all persons infected with HIV eventually become ill with full-blown AIDS, although the incubation
period varies from less than a year to as long as 15 years.
AIDS is considered full-blown when the immune system
is seriously suppressed. At this point, the patient becomes
vulnerable to opportunistic infections and diseases that
are able to attack because of reduced immune system defenses. These include candiasis, pneumocystis carinii
pneumonia (PCP), herpes and other viral infections, toxoplasmosis, and tuberculosis. AIDS also weakens the
body’s defenses against carcinomas, and conditions such
as lymphoma and Kaposi’s sarcoma are common compli-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

lated behavior is increasing among young homosexuals
under the mistaken belief that the threat of AIDS applies
mostly to older gay men. Risky sexual behavior has also
remained widespread among heterosexual teenagers in
the 1990s, especially among African-American and Hispanic males.

Comforting a person with AIDS or any other fatal
illness is challenging for friends, family, and others
around him. Isolation is one of the most difficult aspects
of this disease, often resulting from misinformation and
fear about how the disease is spread. There is no scientific evidence that AIDS is spread through casual contact, and there is no reason to avoid gestures of friendship and comfort, such as a personal visit, a hug, or
holding the patient’s hand.

Anonymous. It Happened to Nancy. New York: Avon Books,
1994.
A Conversation With Magic. Lucky Duck Productions, 1992.
Videorecording.
Foster, Carol, et al., eds. AIDS. Wylie, TX: Information Plus,
1992.
Siegel, Larry. AIDS, The Drug and Alcohol Connection. Center
City, MN: Hazelden, 1989.

According to the World Health Organization, an estimated five to ten million people worldwide are infected
with HIV. The highest incidence of AIDS is in major cities
in Asia, Africa, and the United States. In the United States
alone, there are thought to be over one million infected
with HIV, and over 250,000 cases of full-blown AIDS have
been reported. AIDS has become a leading cause of death
in men and women under the age of 45 and children under
the age of five. Originally thought of as a “gay men’s disease,” in 1993 AIDS was the nation’s fourth leading cause
of death in women between the ages of 15 and 44.
HIV is usually diagnosed through a test called
ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay), which
screens the blood for HIV antibodies. If the test is positive, a more specific test, the Western blot assay, is administered. Most patients will test positive for HIV one
to three months after being infected, and 95 percent will
test positive after five months. There is no effective vaccine against the HIV virus, and no known cure for AIDS,
but antiviral drugs have been effective in slowing the
progression of the disease, particularly the suppression
of the immune system. One of the earliest of these medications to be effective was azidothymidine (AZT),
which inhibits viral DNA polymerase.
The best method of containing the AIDS epidemic is
education and prevention. Much of the anti-AIDS effort
both in the United States and globally has been directed
toward promoting safer sex practices, including abstinence (especially among young people) and the use of
latex condoms, which greatly reduce the chance of infection. The threat of HIV among intravenous drug users
has been addressed by programs offering education, rehabilitation, and the free dispension of sterile needles.
Modification of sexual behavior among homosexuals has
been successful in reducing the incidence of new HIV
infections among the gay population. However, risk-re-

Further Reading

Action potential
A momentary electrical event occurring through
the membrane of a nerve cell fiber in response to a
stimulus, forming a nerve impulse.

An action potential is transmitted along a nerve fiber
as a wave of changing electrical charge. This wave travels at
a speed that ranges from about five feet (1.5 m) per second
to about 350 feet (107 m) per second, depending on various
properties of the nerve fiber involved and other factors.
An action potential occurs in about one millisecond.
During an action potential, there is a change in voltage
across the nerve cell membrane of about 120 millivolts,
and the negative electrical charge inside the resting nerve
cell is reversed to a positive electrical charge. This
change in voltage and reversal of electrical charge results
from the movement of sodium ions, which carry a positive charge, into the nerve cell fiber. This is followed by
the movement of potassium ions, which also carry a positive charge, out of the nerve cell fiber, allowing the
nerve cell to return to its resting state. The temporarily
increased permeability of the nerve cell fiber membrane,
first to sodium ions and then to potassium ions, is caused
by a chemical transmitter substance.
Further Reading
Adams, Raymond. Principles of Neurology. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Adaptation
Behavior that enables an organism to function effectively in its environment.
7

Adaptation

cations of the disease. AIDS also attacks the nervous system. Neurological disorders such as encephalitis and dementia occur in over two-thirds of AIDS patients.
HIV/AIDS patients are also prone to blood abnormalities,
respiratory infections, and gastrointestinal problems, including diarrhea, which is partly responsible for the
weight loss that occurs in the course of the disease.

Addiction/Addictive personality

Adaptation describes the process of change in organisms or species to accommodate to a particular environment, enabling their survival. Adaptation is crucial to the
process of natural selection. Ethologists, scientists who
study the behavior of animals in their natural habitats
from an evolutionary perspective, have documented two
main types of adaptive behavior. Some behaviors, known
as “closed programs,” transmit from one generation to the
next relatively unchanged. “Open genetic programs” involve greater degrees of environmental influence.
Adaptation occurs in individual organisms as well as
in species. Sensory adaptation consists of physical
changes that occur in response to the presence or cessation of stimuli. Examples include the adjustment eyes
make when going from broad daylight into a darkened
room and the way bodies adjust to the temperature of
cold water after an initial plunge. Once a steady level of
stimulation (such as light, sound, or odor) is established,
we no longer notice it. However, any abrupt changes require further adaptation.
The adrenalin-produced reaction to environmental
dangers called the “fight or flight” syndrome (including
rapid breathing, increased heart rate, and sweating) can
also be considered a form of adaptation. The psychological responses involved in classical and operant conditioning, which involve learned behaviors motivated by
either positive reinforcement or fear of punishment,
can also be considered adaptation.

pulsions differ from patterns and habits in that they originate for the purpose of relieving anxiety. Impulse control disorders, such as overeating, constitute a specific
type of compulsive behavior that provides short-term
gratification but is harmful in the long run. In contrast to
these various types of potentially addictive behavior,
physical addiction involves dependence on a habit-forming substance characterized by tolerance and well-defined physiological withdrawal symptoms.
In spite of the variety of activities that can be considered addictive, people who engage in them tend to
have certain attitudes and types of behavior in common.
An addiction is generally associated with relieving anxiety or blocking out other types of uncomfortable feelings. To a greater or lesser extent, people engaged in addictive behavior tend to plan their lives around it; in extreme cases they will do almost anything to obtain the
substance or engage in the behavior. The addiction
makes them neglect other areas of their lives. They are
commonly secretive about it, either out of shame or to
protect their access to a substance. When confronted,
they generally deny that they have a problem, although
privately they regret their addictive behavior, which in
many cases they have tried without success to discontinue. They tend to rationalize engaging in the behavior and
tell themselves they can stop whenever they want. They
may also blame others for their addiction and often experience frequent and uncontrollable mood swings.

A wide spectrum of complex behaviors that ranges
from patterns of behavior to physical addiction.

Substance abuse and dependence (substance-related
disorders) are among the psychological disorders in the
list of major clinical syndromes (Axis I) found in the
American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. Alcohol, which
is classified as a depressant, is probably the most frequently abused psychoactive substance. Alcohol abuse
and dependence affects over 20 million Americans—
about 13 percent of the adult population. An alcoholic
has been defined as a person whose drinking impairs his
or her life adjustment, affecting health, personal relationships, and/or work. Alcohol dependence, sometimes
called alcoholism, is about five times more common in
men than women, although alcohol abuse by women and
by teenagers of both sexes is growing.

Addiction has come to refer to a wide and complex
range of behaviors. In addition to familiar addictions,
such as alcohol dependence, drug dependence, and
smoking, addictive behavior has also been associated
with food, exercise, work, and even relationships with
others (codependency). Some experts describe the spectrum of behaviors designated as addictive in terms of five
interrelated concepts: patterns, habits, compulsions, impulse control disorders, and physical addiction. Com-

When blood alcohol level reaches 0.1 percent, a person is considered to be intoxicated. Judgment and other
rational processes are impaired, as well as motor coordination, speech, and vision. Alcohol abuse typically progresses through a series of stages from social drinking to
chronic alcoholism. Danger signs that indicate the probable onset of a drinking problem include the frequent desire to drink, increased alcohol consumption, memory
lapses (“blanks”), and morning drinking. Among the
most acute reactions to alcohol are four conditions re-

Further Reading
Bateson, P.P.G. Perspectives in Ethology: Behavior and Evolution. New York: Vintage Books, 1993.
Lorenz, Konrad. The Foundations of Ethology. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1981.
Weiner, Jonathan. The Beak of the Finch: A Story of Evolution
in Our Time. New York: Vintage Books, 1995.

Addiction/Addictive
personality

8

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Addiction/Addictive personality

ferred to as alcoholic psychoses: alcohol idiosyncratic
intoxication (an acute reaction in persons with an abnormally low tolerance for alcohol); alcohol withdrawal
delirium (delirium tremens); hallucinations; and Korsakoff’s psychosis, an irreversible brain disorder involving severe memory loss.
Aside from alcohol, other psychoactive substances
most frequently associated with abuse and dependence
are barbiturates (which, like alcohol, are depressants);
narcotics (opium and its derivatives, including heroin);
stimulants (amphetamines and cocaine); antianxiety
drugs (tranquilizers such as Librium and Valium); and
psychedelics and hallucinogens (marijuana, mescaline,
psilocybin, LSD, and PCP). While drug abuse and dependence can occur at any age, they are most frequent in
adolescence and early adulthood.
The causes of substance abuse are multiple. Some
people are at high risk for dependence due to genetic or
physiological factors. Researchers have found the sons
of alcoholics to be twice as prone to alcoholism as other
people. Among pairs of identical twins, if one is an alcoholic, there is a 60 percent chance that the other will be
also. In spite of an apparent inherited tendency toward
alcoholism, the fact that the majority of people with alcoholic parents do not become alcoholics themselves
demonstrates the influence of psychosocial factors, including personality factors and a variety of environmental stressors, such as occupational or marital problems.
Variations in the incidence of alcoholism among different ethnic groups show that social learning also plays
a role in addiction. Parental influence, especially in
terms of modeling the use of alcohol and other drugs,
has a strong influence on the behavior of children and
adolescents, as does peer behavior. Although positive experiences with one drug may lead to experimentation
with another, the “stepping stone” theory of drug use—
for example, using marijuana leads to the use of hard
drugs—is highly speculative as the majority of marijuana smokers do not go on to use other drugs. Only heavy
marijuana use has been linked to the use of other drugs.
Not all addictive behavior involves the use of drugs
or alcohol. One such potentially life-threatening type of
behavior is compulsive overeating associated with obesity. While obesity is viewed as a physiological condition
in some cases, it is commonly linked to a long-standing
pattern of overeating and an addictive relationship to
food that can generally be traced to personality factors in
combination with learned responses. Another type of
non-drug-related addictive behavior is compulsive gambling. While about half of all persons engage in some
form of gambling at some point in their lives, compulsive gamblers carry this activity to the extent that it disrupts their lives psychologically and financially.

Crack users. Crack, a form of cocaine, is one of the most
addictive drugs. (Photo by Roy Morsch. Stock Market.
Reproduced with permission.)

Addictions are difficult to treat. Addictive behavior
often involves long-term psychological problems or ongoing stressors in a person’s life. Rates of initial “cure”
followed by relapse are very high, and many consider recovery to be an ongoing, lifelong process. Physical addictions alter a person’s brain chemistry in ways that
make it difficult to be exposed to the addictive substance
again without lapsing back into addiction; abstinence is
generally necessary for recovery from substance dependency. People addicted to a type of activity—such as
compulsive spending or eating—from which it is impossible to abstain entirely must learn to understand and
alter their behaviors.
The first step in the recovery process is admitting
that there is a problem and seeking help. Biological intervention may be necessary, including medication to
treat withdrawal symptoms and treatment for malnutrition. (Many heroin addicts are given methadone, a synthetic opiate that is addictive but less harmful than hero-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

9

Adjustment disorders

in). There are many kinds of psychological intervention
available, offered in forms ranging from counseling to
inpatient programs. Among the most effective are group
therapy; environmental intervention (which deals with
negative factors in an addict’s social environment); behavior therapy, including aversive conditioning; and
12-step programs based on the approach pioneered by
Alcoholics Anonymous.
See also Alcohol dependence and abuse; Codependence; Drugs/Drug abuse; Gambling, pathological
Further Reading
Cohen, Irving A. Addiction: The High-Low Trap. Santa Fe,
NM: Health Press, 1995.
Engel, Joel. Addicted: In Their Own Words. Kids Talk About
Drugs. New York: Tom Doherty Associates, 1990.
Porterfield, Kay Marie. Focus on Addictions: A Reference
Handbook. Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 1992.

Adjustment disorders
The development of significant emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to an identifiable
event that precipitated significant psychological or
social stress.

Adjustment disorders are maladpative, or unhealthy,
responses to stressful or psychologically distressing life
events, such as the end of a romantic relationship or
being terminated from a job.
The American Psychiatric Association has identified and categorized several varieties of adjustment disorders, depending on accompanying symptoms and their
duration. These subtypes include adjustment disorder
with depressed mood, with anxiety, with anxiety and depressed mood, and with disturbances of conduct. The
disorders can additionally be classified as acute or
chronic. It is thought that adjustment disorders are fairly
common; recent figures estimate that 5 to 20 percent of
persons seeking outpatient psychological treatment suffer from one of these disorders. Psychiatrists rigidly define the time frames in which these disorders can occur
to differentiate them from other types of responses to
stressful events, such as post-traumatic stress disorder
and acute stress disorder. Adjustment disorders must
occur within three months of the stressful event and can,
by definition, last no longer than six months.
Symptoms of these various adjustment disorders include a decrease in performance at work or school, and
withdrawal from social relationships. These disorders
can lead to suicide or suicidal thinking and can complicate the course of other diseases when, for instance, a
10

sufferer loses interest in taking medication as prescribed
or adhering to difficult diets or exercise regimens.
Adjustment disorders can occur at any stage of life.
In early adolescence, individuals with adjustment disorders tend to be angry, aggressive, and defiant. Temper
tantrums are common and are usually well out of balance
with the event that caused them. Other adolescents with
adjustment disorders may, alternately, become passive
and withdrawn, and older teens often experience intense
anxiety or depression. They may experience what psychologists call “depersonalization,” a state in which a
person feels he or she can observe their body interacting
with others, but feels nothing.
Many psychological theorists and researchers consider adjustment disorders in adolescents as a stage in establishing an identity. Adolescents may develop adjustment disorders as part of a defense mechanism meant to
break their feelings of dependence on their parents. This
sort of psychological maneuver may precipitate problems
in families as adolescents begin seeking individuals outside the family as replacements for their parents. This can
be particularly destructive when these feelings of dependence are transferred to involvement with gangs or cults.
Further Reading
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th
ed. Washington, D.C.: American Psychiatric Association,
1994.
Nicholi, Armand, ed. The New Harvard Guide to Psychiatry.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988.
“The Not-So Maddening Crowd: Crowding Stress Leads to
Coping Behavior in Primates.” Discover (February
1994): 14.
Shanok, Rebecca. “Coping with Crisis.” Parents Magazine
(October 1991): 169.

Alfred Adler
1870-1937
Psychiatrist known for his theory of individual psychology and for his pioneering work with children
and families.

Alfred Adler was born in a suburb of Vienna, Austria, in 1870. After graduating from the University of Vienna medical school in 1895, he at first practiced ophthalmology but later switched to psychiatry. In 1902, Adler
joined the discussion group that later became the Vienna
Psychoanalytic Society. Sigmund Freud was also a
member. Adler eventually became president and editor of
its journal. After 1907, however, Adler’s growing disagreement with Freud’s theories, especially with their

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Adolescence

heavy emphasis on the role of sexuality in personality
formation, alienated him from the ranks of Freudians.
In 1911, Adler and his followers left the Psychoanalytic Society to form their own group, The Society of Individual Psychology, and developed the system of individual psychology, a holistic, humanistic, therapeutic approach. Adlerian psychology views the individual as primarily a social rather than a sexual being and places
more emphasis on choices and values than Freudian psychology. Adler saw the individual striving toward perfection and overcoming feelings of inferiority (a concept
later popularized as the “inferiority complex”). After
serving in military hospitals during World War I, Adler
became interested in child psychology. He established a
network of public child guidance clinics in the Vienna
school system, offering what was probably the very first
family counseling. There were 28 of these facilities in
operation until the Nazis ordered them closed in 1934.
Adlerian parent study groups still meet throughout the
United States and Canada.
In 1926 Adler began dividing his time between Vienna and the United States. He was appointed visiting
lecturer at Columbia University in New York in 1927. In
1932 he became a lecturer at the Long Island College of
Medicine and emigrated to the United States with his
wife. Adler died suddenly in 1937 in Aberdeen, Scotland, while on a lecture tour. There are more than 100
professional Adlerian organizations and 34 training institutes in the United States, Canada, and Europe.
Further Reading
Adler, Alfred. Co-operation Between the Sexes: Writings on
Women and Men, Love and Marriage, and Sexuality. New
York: Norton, 1982.
———. The Individual Psychology of Alfred Adler: A Systematic Presentation in Selections From His Writings. New
York: Harper & Row, 1964.

Alfred Adler (Archive Photos, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

dicate that the percent of the U.S. population between the
ages of 14 and 17 will peak around the year 2005.
There is no single event or boundary line that denotes the end of childhood or the beginning of adolescence. Rather, experts think of the passage from childhood into and through adolescence as composed of a set
of transitions that unfold gradually and that touch upon
many aspects of the individual’s behavior, development,
and relationships. These transitions are biological, cognitive, social, and emotional.

Puberty

Adolescence
Sometimes referred to as teenage years, youth, or
puberty, adolescence covers the period from
roughly age 10 to 20 in a child’s development.

In the study of child development, adolescence
refers to the second decade of the life span, roughly from
ages 10 to 20. The word adolescence is Latin in origin,
derived from the verb adolescere, which means “to grow
into adulthood.” In all societies, adolescence is a time of
growing up, of moving from the immaturity of childhood
into the maturity of adulthood. Population projections in-

The biological transition of adolescence, or puberty, is perhaps the most salient sign that adolescence has
begun. Technically, puberty refers to the period during
which an individual becomes capable of sexual reproduction. More broadly speaking, however, puberty is
used as a collective term to refer to all the physical
changes that occur in the growing girl or boy as the individual passes from childhood into adulthood.
The timing of physical maturation varies widely. In
the United States today, menarche, the first menstrual
period, typically occurs around age 12, although some
youngsters start puberty when they are only eight or

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

11

Adolescence

nine, others when they are well into their teens. The duration of puberty also varies greatly: eighteen months to
six years in girls and two to five years in boys.
The physical changes of puberty are triggered by
hormones, chemical substances in the body that act on
specific organs and tissues. In boys a major change is the
increased production of testosterone, a male sex hormone, while girls experience increased production of the
female hormone estrogen. In both sexes, a rise in growth
hormone produces the adolescent growth spurt, the pronounced increase in height and weight that marks the
first half of puberty.
Perhaps the most dramatic changes of puberty involve sexuality. Internally, through the development of
primary sexual characteristics, adolescents become capable of sexual reproduction. Externally, as secondary sexual characteristics appear, girls and boys begin to look
like mature women and men. In boys primary and secondary sexual characteristics usually emerge in a predictable order, with rapid growth of the testes and scrotum, accompanied by the appearance of pubic hair.
About a year later, when the growth spurt begins, the
penis also grows larger, and pubic hair becomes coarser,
thicker, and darker. Later still comes the growth of facial
and body hair, and a gradual lowering of the voice.
Around mid-adolescence internal changes begin making
a boy capable of producing and ejaculating sperm.
In girls, sexual characteristics develop in a less regular sequence. Usually, the first sign of puberty is a slight
elevation of the breasts, but sometimes this is preceded
by the appearance of pubic hair. Pubic hair changes from
sparse and downy to denser and coarser. Concurrent with
these changes is further breast development. In teenage
girls, internal sexual changes include maturation of the
uterus, vagina, and other parts of the reproductive system. Menarche, the first menstrual period, happens relatively late, not at the start of puberty as many people believe. Regular ovulation and the ability to carry a baby to
full term usually follow menarche by several years.
For many years, psychologists believed that puberty
was stressful for young people. We now know that any
difficulties associated with adjusting to puberty are minimized if adolescents know what changes to expect and
have positive attitudes toward them. Although the immediate impact of puberty on the adolescent’s self-image
and mood may be very modest, the timing of physical
maturation does affect the teen’s social and emotional
development in important ways. Early-maturing boys
tend to be more popular, to have more positive self-conceptions, and to be more self-assured than their later-maturing peers, whereas early-maturing girls may feel awkward and self-conscious.
12

Cognitive transition
A second element of the passage through adolescence is a cognitive transition. Compared to children,
adolescents think in ways that are more advanced, more
efficient, and generally more complex. This can be seen
in five ways.
First, during adolescence individuals become better
able than children to think about what is possible, instead of limiting their thought to what is real. Whereas
children’s thinking is oriented to the here and now—that
is, to things and events that they can observe directly,
adolescents are able to consider what they observe
against a backdrop of what is possible—they can think
hypothetically.
Second, during the passage into adolescence, individuals become better able to think about abstract ideas.
For example, adolescents find it easier than children to
comprehend the sorts of higher-order, abstract logic inherent in puns, proverbs, metaphors, and analogies. The
adolescent’s greater facility with abstract thinking also
permits the application of advanced reasoning and logical processes to social and ideological matters. This is
clearly seen in the adolescent’s increased facility and interest in thinking about interpersonal relationships, politics, philosophy, religion, and morality—topics that involve such abstract concepts as friendship, faith,
democracy, fairness, and honesty.
Third, during adolescence individuals begin thinking more often about the process of thinking itself, or
metacognition. As a result, adolescents may display increased introspection and self-consciousness. Although
improvements in metacognitive abilities provide important intellectual advantages, one potentially negative byproduct of these advances is the tendency for adolescents
to develop a sort of egocentrism, or intense preoccupation with the self. Acute adolescent egocentrism sometimes leads teenagers to believe that others are constantly
watching and evaluating them, much as an audience
glues its attention to an actor on a stage. Psychologists
refer to this as the imaginary audience.
A fourth change in cognition is that thinking tends to
become multidimensional, rather than limited to a single
issue. Whereas children tend to think about things one aspect at a time, adolescents can see things through more
complicated lenses. Adolescents describe themselves and
others in more differentiated and complicated terms and
find it easier to look at problems from multiple perspectives. Being able to understand that people’s personalities
are not one-sided, or that social situations can have different interpretations, depending on one’s point of view, permits the adolescent to have far more sophisticated—and
complicated—relationships with other people.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Adolescence

Finally, adolescents are more likely than children to
see things as relative, rather than absolute. Children tend
to see things in absolute terms—in black and white.
Adolescents, in contrast, tend to see things as relative.
They are more likely to question others’ assertions and
less likely to accept “facts” as absolute truths. This increase in relativism can be particularly exasperating to
parents, who may feel that their adolescent children
question everything just for the sake of argument. Difficulties often arise, for example, when adolescents begin
seeing their parents’ values as excessively relative.

Emotional transition
In addition to being a time of biological and cognitive change, adolescence is also a period of emotional
transition and, in particular, changes in the way individuals view themselves and in their capacity to function independently.
During adolescence, important shifts occur in the
way individuals think about and characterize themselves—that is, in their self-conceptions. As individuals
mature intellectually and undergo the sorts of cognitive
changes described earlier, they come to perceive themselves in more sophisticated and differentiated ways.
Compared with children, who tend to describe themselves in relatively simple, concrete terms, adolescents
are more likely to employ complex, abstract, and psychological self-characterizations. As individuals’ selfconceptions become more abstract and as they become
more able to see themselves in psychological terms, they
become more interested in understanding their own personalities and why they behave the way they do.
Conventional wisdom holds that adolescents have
low self-esteem —that they are more insecure and selfcritical than children or adults—but most research indicates otherwise. Although teenagers’ feelings about
themselves may fluctuate, especially during early adolescence, their self-esteem remains fairly stable from
about age 13 on. If anything, self-esteem increases over
the course of middle and late adolescence. Most researchers today believe that self-esteem is multidimensional, and that young people evaluate themselves along
several different dimensions. As a consequence, it is possible for an adolescent to have high self-esteem when it
comes to his academic abilities, low self-esteem when it
comes to athletics, and moderate self-esteem when it
comes to his physical appearance.
One theorist whose work has been very influential on
our understanding of adolescents’ self-conceptions is Erik
Erikson, who theorized that the establishment of a coherent sense of identity is the chief psychosocial task of adolescence. Erikson believed that the complications inherent

During adolescence, most American girls experiment with
make-up. (Photo by Robert J. Huffman. Field Mark Publications.
Reproduced with permission.)

in identity development in modern society have created
the need for a psychosocial moratorium—a time-out during adolescence from the sorts of excessive responsibilities and obligations that might restrict the young person’s
pursuit of self-discovery. During the psychosocial moratorium, the adolescent can experiment with different roles
and identities, in a context that permits and encourages
this sort of exploration. The experimentation involves trying on different personalities and ways of behaving.
Sometimes, parents describe their teenage children as
going through “phases.” Much of this behavior is actually
experimentation with roles and personalities.
For most adolescents, establishing a sense of autonomy, or independence, is as important a part of the emotional transition out of childhood as is establishing a
sense of identity. During adolescence, there is a movement away from the dependency typical of childhood toward the autonomy typical of adulthood. One can see
this in several ways.
First, older adolescents do not generally rush to their
parents whenever they are upset, worried, or in need of
assistance. Second, they do not see their parents as allknowing or all-powerful. Third, adolescents often have a
great deal of emotional energy wrapped up in relationships outside the family; in fact, they may feel more attached to a boyfriend or a girlfriend than to their parents.
And finally, older adolescents are able to see and interact
with their parents as people—not just as their parents.
Many parents find, for example, that they can confide in

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

13

Adolescence

their adolescent children, something that was not possible when their children were younger, or that their adolescent children can easily sympathize with them when
they have had a hard day at work.
Some theorists have suggested that the development
of independence be looked at in terms of the adolescent’s
developing sense of individuation. The process of individuation, which begins during infancy and continues
well into late adolescence, involves a gradual, progressive sharpening of one’s sense of self as autonomous, as
competent, and as separate from one’s parents. Individuation, therefore, has a great deal to do with the development of a sense of identity, in that it involves changes in
how we come to see and feel about ourselves.
The process of individuation does not necessarily
involve stress and internal turmoil. Rather, individuation
entails relinquishing childish dependencies on parents in
favor of more mature, more responsible, and less dependent relationships. Adolescents who have been successful in establishing a sense of individuation can accept responsibility for their choices and actions instead of looking to their parents to do it for them.

what less oriented toward their parents and more oriented
toward their peers, and peer pressure begins to escalate.
During early adolescence, conformity to parents continues to decline and conformity to peers and peer pressure
continues to rise. It is not until middle adolescence, then,
that genuine behavioral independence emerges, when conformity to parents as well as peers declines.

Social transition
Accompanying the biological, cognitive, and emotional transitions of adolescence are important changes
in the adolescent’s social relationships, or the social
transition of adolescence. Developmentalists have spent
considerable time charting the changes that take place
with friends and with family members as the individual
moves through the adolescent years.
One of the most noteworthy aspects of the social
transition into adolescence is the increase in the amount
of time individuals spend with their peers. Although relations with agemates exist well before adolescence, during the teenage years they change in significance and
structure. Four specific developments stand out.

Being independent means more than merely feeling
independent, of course. It also means being able to make
your own decisions and to select a sensible course of action by yourself. This is an especially important capability in contemporary society, where many adolescents are
forced to become independent decision makers at an
early age. In general, researchers find that decision-making abilities improve over the course of the adolescent
years, with gains continuing well into the later years of
high school.

First, there is a sharp increase during adolescence in
the sheer amount of time individuals spend with their
peers and in the relative time they spend in the company
of peers versus adults. In the United States, well over half
of the typical adolescent’s waking hours are spent with
peers, as opposed to only 15% with adults—including
parents. Second, during adolescence, peer groups function
much more often without adult supervision than they do
during childhood. Third, during adolescence increasingly
more contact with peers is with opposite-sex friends.

Many parents wonder about the susceptibility of
adolescents to peer pressure. In general, studies that
contrast parent and peer influences indicate that in some
situations, peers’ opinions are more influential, while in
others, parents’ are more influential. Specifically, adolescents are more likely to conform to their peers’ opinions
when it comes to short-term, day-to-day, and social matters—styles of dress, tastes in music, and choices among
leisure activities. This is particularly true during junior
high school and the early years of high school. When it
comes to long-term questions concerning educational or
occupational plans, however, or values, religious beliefs,
and ethical issues, teenagers are influenced in a major
way by their parents.

Finally, whereas children’s peer relationships are
limited mainly to pairs of friends and relatively small
groups—three or four children at a time, for example—
adolescence marks the emergence of larger groups of
peers, or crowds. Crowds are large collectives of similarly stereotyped individuals who may or may not spend
much time together. In contemporary American high
schools, typical crowds are “jocks,” “brains,” “nerds,”
“populars,” “druggies,” and so on. In contrast to cliques,
crowds are not settings for adolescents’ intimate interactions or friendships, but, instead, serve to locate the adolescent (to himself and to others) within the social structure of the school. As well, the crowds themselves tend
to form a sort of social hierarchy or map of the school,
and different crowds are seen as having different degrees
of status or importance.

Susceptibility to the influence of parents and peers
changes with development. In general, during childhood,
boys and girls are highly oriented toward their parents and
less so toward their peers; peer pressure during the early
elementary school years is not especially strong. As they
approach adolescence, however, children become some14

The importance of peers during early adolescence
coincides with changes in individuals’ needs for intimacy. As children begin to share secrets with their friends, a
new sense of loyalty and commitment grows, a belief

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

One of the most important social transitions that
takes place in adolescence concerns the emergence of
sexual and romantic relationships. In contemporary society, most young people begin dating sometime during
early adolescence.
Dating during adolescence can mean a variety of
different things, from group activities that bring males
and females together (without much actual contact between the sexes); to group dates, in which a group of
boys and girls go out jointly (and spend part of the time
as couples and part of the time in large groups); to casual
dating as couples; and to serious involvement with a
steady boyfriend or girlfriend. More adolescents have
experience in mixed-sex group activities like parties or
dances than dating, and more have experience in dating
than in having a serious boyfriend or girlfriend.
Most adolescents’ first experience with sex falls into
the category of “autoerotic behavior”—sexual behavior
that is experienced alone. The most common autoerotic
activities reported by adolescents are erotic fantasies and
masturbation. By the time most adolescents have
reached high school, they have had some experience
with sex in the context of a relationship. About half of all
American teenagers have had sexual intercourse by the
time of high school graduation.
Estimates of the prevalence of sexual intercourse
among American adolescents vary considerably from study
to study, depending on the nature of the sample surveyed
and the year and region in which the study was undertaken.
Although regional and ethnic variations make it difficult to
generalize about the “average” age at which American adolescents initiate sexual intercourse, national surveys of
young people indicate that more adolescents are sexually
active at an earlier age today than in the recent past.
For many years, researchers studied the psychological and social characteristics of adolescents who engaged in premarital sex, assuming that sexually active
teenagers were more troubled than their peers. This view
has been replaced as sexual activity has become more
prevalent. Indeed, several recent studies show that sexual
activity during adolescence is decidedly not associated
with psychological disturbance.

time of inherent and inevitable family conflict, early
adolescence is a period of significant change and reorganization in family relationships. In most families, there is
a movement during adolescence from patterns of influence and interaction that are asymmetrical and unequal
to ones in which parents and their adolescent children
are on a more equal footing. Family relationships change
most around the time of puberty, with increasing conflict
between adolescents and their parents—especially between adolescents and their mothers—and closeness between adolescents and their parents diminishing somewhat. Changes in the ways adolescents view family rules
and regulations, especially, may contribute to increased
disagreement between them and their parents.
Although puberty seems to distance adolescents from
their parents, it is not associated with familial “storm and
stress,” however. Family conflict during this stage is more
likely to take the form of bickering over day-to-day issues
than outright fighting. Similarly, the diminished closeness
is more likely to be manifested in increased privacy on the
part of the adolescent and diminished physical affection
between teenagers and parents, rather than any serious
loss of love or respect between parents and children. Research suggests that this distancing is temporary, though,
and that family relationships may become less conflicted
and more intimate during late adolescence.
Generally speaking, most young people are able to
negotiate the biological, cognitive, emotional, and social
transitions of adolescence successfully. Although the
mass media bombard us with images of troubled youth,
systematic research indicates that the vast majority of individuals move from childhood into and through adolescence without serious difficulty.
Laurence Steinberg, Ph.D.
Further Reading
Feldman, S., and G. Elliott, eds. At the Threshold: The Developing Adolescent. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1990.
Pipher, Mary. Reviving Ophelia. New York: Ballantine Books,
1994.
Steinberg, L. Adolescence. 4th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1996.
Steinberg, L., and A. Levine. You and Your Adolescent: A Parent’s Guide for Ages 10 to 20. New York: HarperPerennial, 1991.

Although it is incorrect to characterize adolescence
as a time when the family ceases to be important, or as a
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Adoption
A practice in which an adult assumes the role of
parent for a child who is not his or her biological
offspring.
15

Adoption

that friends can trust each other. During adolescence, the
search for intimacy intensifies, and self-disclosure between best friends becomes an important pastime.
Teenagers, especially girls, spend hours discussing their
innermost thoughts and feelings, trying to understand
one another. The discovery that they tend to think and
feel the same as someone else becomes another important basis of friendship.

Adoption

An adult assumes the role of parent for a child other
than his or her own biological offspring in the process of
adoption. Informal adoptions occur when a relative or
stepparent assumes permanent parental responsibilities
without court involvement. However, legally recognized
adoptions require a court or other government agency to
award permanent custody of a child (or, occasionally, an
older individual) to adoptive parents. Specific requirements for adoption vary among states and countries.
Adoptions can be privately arranged through individuals
or agencies, or arranged through a public agency such as
a state’s child protective services. Adoptees may be infants or older children; they may be adopted singly or as
sibling groups; and they may come from the local area or
from other countries. Adoptive parents may be traditional married couples, but they may also be single men or
women or non-traditional couples. Parents may be childless or have other children.
Adoption is a practice that dates to ancient times, although there have been fundamental changes in the
process. Ancient Romans, for example, saw adoption as
a way of ensuring male heirs to childless couples so that
family lines and religious traditions could be maintained. In contrast, modern American adoption laws are
written in support of the best interests of the child, not of
the adopter.
Modern American adoption laws evolved during the
latter half of the 19th century, prompted by changes due to
the Industrial Revolution, large numbers of immigrant
children who were often in need of care, and a growing
concern for child welfare. Because of the poor health conditions in the tenements of large cities, many children were
left on their own at early ages. These dependent children
were sometimes placed in almshouses with the mentally
ill, and sometimes in foundling homes plagued by high
mortality rates. In the 1850s the Children’s Aid Society of
New York City began to move dependent children out of
city institutions. Between 1854 and 1904 orphan trains carried an estimated 100,000 children to the farms of the Midwest where they were placed with families and generally
expected to help with farm work in exchange for care.
Massachusetts became the first state to pass legislation mandating judicial supervision of adoptions in 1851,
and by 1929 all states had passed some type of adoption
legislation. During the early part of the 20th century it
was standard practice to conduct adoptions in secret and
with records sealed, in part to protect the parties involved from the social stigma of illegitimate birth. After
WWI two factors combined to increase interest in the
adoption of infants. The development of formula feeding
allowed for the raising of infants without a ready supply
of breast milk, and psychological theory and research
about the relative importance of training and condition16

ing in child rearing eased the concerns of childless couples about potential “bad seeds.” Because of the burgeoning interest in infant adoptions, many states legislated investigations of prospective adoptive parents and
court approval prior to finalization of the adoption.
Until about mid-century the balance of infant supply
and parent demand was roughly equal. However during
the 1950s the demand for healthy white infants began to
outweigh the supply. Agencies began to establish matching criteria in an attempt to provide the best fit between
characteristics of the child or birth parents and the adoptive parents, matching on items such as appearance, ethnicity, education, and religious affiliation. By the 1970s
it was not uncommon for parents to wait 3-5 years after
their initial application to a private adoption agency before they had a healthy infant placed with them. These
trends resulted from a decrease in the numbers of infants
surrendered for adoption following the increased availability of birth control, the legalization of abortion, and
the increasingly common decision of unmarried mothers
to keep their infants.
In response to this dearth of healthy, same-race infants, prospective adoptive parents turned increasingly to
international and transracial adoptions. Children from
Japan and Europe began to be placed with American families by agencies after WWII, and since the 1950s Korea
has been the major source of international adoptions (except in 1991 with the influx of Romanian children). The
one child policy of the Chinese government has provided
a new source of infants to American families, and recently many adoptees have come from Peru, Colombia, El
Salvador, Mexico, the Philippines, and India.
The civil rights movement of the 1960s was accompanied by an increase in the number of transracial adoptions involving black children and white parents. These
adoptions peaked in 1971, and one year later the National Association of Black Social Workers issued a statement opposing transracial adoption. They argued that
white families were unable to foster the growth of psychological and cultural identity in black children. Transracial adoptions now account for a small percentage of
all adoptions, and these most frequently involve Koreanborn children and white American families.
While healthy infants have been much in demand
for adoption during the last 50 years, the number of other
children waiting for adoptive homes has grown. In response, the U.S. Congress passed the federal Adoption
Assistance Child Welfare Act (Public Law 96-272) in
1980, giving subsidies to families adopting children with
special needs that typically make a child hard to place.
Although individual states may define the specific parameters, these characteristics include older age, medical

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Types of adoption
Adoption arrangements are typically thought of as
either closed or open. Actually, they may involve many
varying degrees of openness about identity and contact
between the adoptive family and the birth family. At one
extreme is the closed adoption in which an intermediary
third party is the only one who knows the identity of both
the birth and adoptive parents. The child may be told he
or she is adopted, but will have no information about his
or her biological heritage. When the stigma attached to
births out of wedlock was greater, most adoptions were
closed and records permanently sealed; however, a move
to open records has been promoted by groups of both
adoptees and by some birth mothers. Currently about half
of the states allow access to sealed records with the mutual consent of adoptee and birth parent, and others have
search processes through intermediary parties available.
Why search? Some research and clinical observation suggests that, especially during adolescence, healthy identity
formation depends on full awareness of one’s origins
(Where do I get my freckles? Why do I have this musical
ability? Why did they give me up?). Other important
medical history may be critical to the adoptee’s health
care planning. For birth mothers, sometimes they simply
want to know that their child turned out okay.
The move to open records lead to an increase in
open adoptions in which information is shared from the
beginning. Open adoptions may be completely open, as
is the case when the birth parents (usually the mother)
and adoptive parents meet beforehand and agree to maintain contact while the child is growing up. The child then
has full knowledge of both sets of parents.
Other open adoptions may include less contact, or
periodic letters sent to an intermediary agency, or continued contact with some family members but not others. It
can be a complex issue. In the case of an older child who
is removed from the family by protective services because of abuse or neglect, the child clearly knows his
birth parents as well as any other siblings. If these siblings are also removed and placed in different adoptive
homes, it may be decided that periodic visits between the
the children—once every few months, perhaps—should
be maintained, but that contact with the abusive parents
should be terminated until the child reaches adulthood
and may choose to search. Siblings may know each
other’s placements, but the birth parents may have no
knowledge of the children’s whereabouts. However, if a
child is ultimately adopted by the foster family with
whom he or she was initially placed prior to the termina-

tion of parental rights or visitation, then the birth parents
might have knowledge of the child’s placement and
whereabouts even though continued contact may not be
deemed in the best interests of the child.
Children removed from families for protective issues
are sometimes reunited with their parents after a stay in
temporary foster homes and after the parents have had the
chance to rehabilitate and are able to care adequately for
their children. On the other hand, it may be decided that
reunification is not a feasible objective for a particular
family and a permanent home is then sought. The foster
family then plays a major role in the child’s transition to
his or her “forever family.” The desire to provide children
with permanent homes and the resulting sense of security
and attachment as soon as possible gives rise to another
type of adoption, the legal risk adoption.
Legal risk adoptions involve placement in the
prospective adoptive home prior to the legal termination
of parental rights and subsequent freeing of the child for
adoption. In these cases, child protective services are
generally involved and relatively certain that the courts
will ultimately decide in favor of the adoptive placement.
The legal process can be drawn out if birth parents contest the agency’s petition for termination. Although there
is the risk that the adoption may not be finalized and that
the child will be returned to his or her birth parents, social service agencies generally do not recommend such
placements unless, in their best judgments, the potential
benefits to child and family far outweigh the legal risk.
Whether the child is free for adoption or a legal risk
placement, there is generally a waiting period before the
adoption is finalized or recognized by the courts. Although estimates vary, about 10% of adoptions disrupt,
that is, the child is removed from the family before finalization. This figure has risen with the increase in older
and special needs children being placed for adoption. The
risk of disruption increases with the age of the child at
placement, a history of multiple placements prior to the
adoptive home, and acting-out behavior problems. Interestingly, many children who have experienced disruption
go on to be successfully adopted, suggesting that disruption is often a bad fit between parental expectations,
skills, or resources and the child’s needs. Many agencies
conduct parent support groups for adoptive families, and
some states have instituted training programs to alert
prospective adoptive parents to the challenges—as well
as the rewards—of adopting special needs children,
thereby attempting to minimize the risk of disruption.

Who gets adopted?
Estimating the total number of children adopted in
the United States is difficult because private and indepen-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

17

Adoption

disabilities, minority group status, and certain physical,
mental, or emotional needs.

Adoption

dent adoptions are reported only voluntarily to census centers. According to the National Committee for Adoption,
there were just over 100,000 domestic adoptions in the
U.S. in 1986, roughly an even split between related and
unrelated adoptions. Of unrelated domestic adoptees,
about 40% were placed by public agencies, 30% by private agencies, and 30% by private individuals. Almost half
of these adoptees were under the age of two, and about
one-quarter had special needs. There were also just over
10,000 international adoptions, the majority of these children under the age of two and placed by private agencies.
The American Public Welfare Association has collected data through the Voluntary Cooperative Information System on children in welfare systems across the
U.S. who are somewhere in the process of being adopted.
Of children in the public welfare systems, about one-third
had their adoptions finalized in 1988, one-third were living in their adoptive home waiting for finalization, and
one-third were awaiting adoptive placements. Key statistics on these adoptions appear in the accompanying table.
Adoptions may be arranged privately through individuals, or a public or private agency may be involved.
Although adopting parents may have certain expenses if
the adoption is privately arranged, adoptions are assumed
to be a gratuitous exchange by law. No parties may profit
improperly from adoption arrangements and children are
not to be brokered. The objectives of public and private
agencies can differ somewhat. Private agencies generally
have prospective adoptive parents as their clients and the
agency works to find a child for them. Public agencies,
on the other hand, have children as their clients and the
procurement of parents as their primary mission.

Outcomes of adoption
There is general agreement that children who are
adopted and raised in families do better than children
raised in institutions or raised with birth parents who are
neglectful or abusive. Compared to the general population, however, the conclusions are less robust and the interpretation of the statistics is not clear. Adopted adolescents, for example, receive mental health services more
often than their non-adopted peers, but this may be because adoptive families are more likely to seek helping
services or because once referring physicians or counselors know that a child is adopted they assume there are
likely to be problems warranting professional attention.
When adjustment problems are manifested by
adoptees, they tend to occur around school age or during
adolescence. D. M. Brodzinsky and his colleagues have
conducted a series of studies from which they conclude
that adopted infants and toddlers generally do not differ
from non-adopted youngsters, but greater risks for prob18

lems such as aggression or depression emerge as the 57-year-old child begins to understand the salience and
implications of being adopted. Still, it should be noted
that the absolute incidence of adjustment problems in
adoptees is low even though it may be statistically higher
than the corresponding figures for non-adoptees.
In the course of normal development, adolescence
is seen as a time of identity formation and emerging independence. Adopted adolescents are faced with the
challenge of integrating disparate sources of identity—
their biological origins and their family of rearing—as
they establish themselves as individuals. For some this is
a difficult task and may result in rebellious or depressive
behavior, risks for all adolescents. Many adoption experts feel that families who do not acknowledge the
child’s birth heritage from the beginning may increase
the likelihood that their child will experience an especially difficult adolescence.
Problems associated with adoption may not always
be the result of psychological adjustment to adoption status or a reflection of less than optimal family dynamics.
Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) was
found to be more prevalent in adoptees than nonadoptees, both among children adopted as infants and
children removed from the home at older ages. C. K.
Deutsch suggests that ADHD in children adopted as infants may be genetically inherited from the birth parents
and perhaps reflected in the impulsive behavior that resulted in the child’s birth in the first place. In the case of
children who have been removed from the home because
of the trauma of abuse, the hypervigilance used to cope
with a threatening environment may compromise the
child’s ability to achieve normal attention regulation
Many of the studies addressing the outcomes of
adoption fail to consider important factors such as the
pre-placement history of the child, the structure and dynamic of the adopting family, or the courses of individual children’s development. Many studies are cross-sectional rather than longitudinal by design, meaning that
different groups of children at different ages are studied
rather than the same children being followed over a period of time. It is also difficult to establish what control or
comparison groups should be used. Should adopted children be compared to other children in the types of families into which they have been adopted or should they be
compared to children in the types of families from which
they have been surrendered? These are complex issues
because adoptees are a heterogeneous group, and it is as
important to understand their individual differences as it
is their commonalities.
Doreen Arcus, Ph.D.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Brodzinsky, D. M., and M. D. Schechter, eds. The Psychology
of Adoption. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Brodzinsky, D. M. “Long-Term Outcomes in Adoption.” The
Future of Children 3, 1993, pp. 153-66.
Caplan. L. An Open Adoption. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin,
1990.
Deutsch, D. K., J. M. Swanson, and J. H. Bruell. “Overrepresentation of Adoptees in Children with Attention Deficit
Disorder.” Behavior Genetics 12, 1982, pp. 231-37.
Lancaster, K. Keys to Adopting a Child. Hauppauge, NY: Barron’s Educational Series, 1994.
Melina, L. R. Making Sense of Adoption. New York: Harper &
Row, 1989.
National Committee for Adoption (NCFA). 1989 Adoption
Factbook. Washington, DC: National Committee for
Adoption, 1989.
Stolley, K. S. “Statistics on Adoption in the United States.” The
Future of Children 3, pp. 26-42.
Tatara, T. Characteristics of Children in Substitute and Adoptive Care: A Statistical Summary of the VCIS National
Child Welfare Base. Washington, DC: American Public
Welfare Association, 1992.

Further Information
AASK (Adopt A Special Kid). 2201 Broadway, Suite 702,
Oakland, CA 94612, (510) 451–1748.
Adopted Child. P.O. Box 9362, Moscow, ID 83842, (208)
882–1794, fax: (208) 883–8035.
Adoptive Families of America. 3333 North Highway 100, Minneapolis, MN 55422, (800) 372–3300.
American Adoption Congress. 1000 Connecticut Ave., N.W.,
Suite 9, Washington, DC 20036, (202) 483–3399 (Public
information center.)
Child Welfare League of America. P.O. Box 7816, 300 Raritan
Center Pkwy, Edison, NJ 08818-7816, (800) 407–6273.
National Adoption Center. 1500 Walnut Street, Philadelphia,
PA 19102 (Provides information especially with regard to
special needs adoption.)
National Adoption Information Clearinghouse. 11426
Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852, (202) 842–1919
(Resource for information and referral. Maintains copies
of all state and federal adoption laws, including Public
Law 96-272, The Adoption Assistance and Child Welfare
Act of 1980.)
National Council for Single Adoptive Parents. P.O. Box 15084,
Chevy Chase, MD 20825, (202) 966–6367.

Affective disorders
See Bipolar disorder; Depression; Mania

Affect
A psychological term for an observable expression
of emotion.

A person’s affect is the expression of emotion or
feelings displayed to others through facial expressions,
hand gestures, voice tone, and other emotional signs
such as laughter or tears. Individual affect fluctuates according to emotional state. What is considered a normal
range of affect, called the broad effect, varies from culture to culture, and even within a culture. Certain individuals may gesture prolifically while talking, and display dramatic facial expressions in reaction to social situations or other stimuli. Others may show little outward
response to social environments, expressing a narrow
range of emotions to the outside world.
Persons with psychological disorders may display
variations in their affect. A restricted or constricted affect describes a mild restriction in the range or intensity
of display of feelings. As the reduction in display of
emotion becomes more severe, the term blunted affect
may be applied. The absence of any exhibition of emotions is described as flat affect where the voice is monotone, the face expressionless, and the body immobile. Labile affect describes emotional instability or
dramatic mood swings. When the outward display of
emotion is out of context for the situation, such as
laughter while describing pain or sadness, the affect is
termed inappropriate.
See also Mood
Further Reading
Moore, Bert S. and Alice M. Isen, eds. Affect and Social Behavior. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Thayer, S. The Origin of Everyday Moods. New York Oxford
University Press, 1995.

Affiliation
The need to form attachments to other people for
support, guidance, and protection.

The need to form attachments with others is termed
affiliation. Attachment is one of 20 psychological
needs measured by the Thematic Apperception Test, a
projective personality test developed at Harvard University in 1935 by Henry Murray. Subjects look at a
series of up to 20 pictures of people in a variety of recognizable settings and construct a story about what is
happening in each one. The need for affiliation (referred

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

19

Affiliation

Further Reading

Aggression
Facial expressions are an important part of a person’s affect. (Photo by Robert J. Huffman. Field Mark Publications. Reproduced
with permission.)

to as “n Aff”) is scored when a test-taker’s response to
one of the pictures demonstrates concern over “establishing, maintaining, or restoring a positive affective relationship with another person.” In the hierarchy of
needs outlined by Abraham Maslow, the need for affiliation (or “belongingness”) appears midway between
the most basic physical needs and the highest-level need
for self-actualization.
Anxiety has been observed to strengthen one’s need
for affiliation. In addition, females generally show a
higher need for affiliation than males. Traditionally, affiliation has been negatively correlated with achievement.
While achievement centers on one’s personal self-improvement, affiliation focuses on concern for others,
even to the extent of deliberately suppressing competitive tendencies or accomplishments that may make others less comfortable.
Further Reading
Harvey, Terri L., Ann L. Orbuch, and John H. Weber, eds. Attributions, Accounts, and Close Relationships. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1992.
Meinhold, Patricia. Child Psychology: Development and Behavior Analysis. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt, 1993.
20

Aggression
Any act that is intended to cause pain, suffering, or
damage to another person.

Aggressive behavior is often used to claim status,
precedent, or access to an object or territory. While aggression is primarily thought of as physical, verbal attacks aimed at causing psychological harm also constitute aggression. In addition, fantasies involving hurting
others can also be considered aggressive. The key component in aggression is that it is deliberate—accidental
injuries are not forms of aggression.
Theories about the nature and causes of aggression
vary widely in their emphases. Those with a biological
orientation are based on the idea that aggression is an innate human instinct or drive. Sigmund Freud explained
aggression in terms of a death wish or instinct (Thanatos)
that is turned outward toward others in a process called
displacement. Aggressive impulses that are not channeled
toward a specific person or group may be expressed indirectly through safe, socially acceptable activities such as

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Today, instinct theories of aggression are largely
discredited in favor of other explanations. One is the
frustration-aggression hypothesis first set forth in the
1930s by John Dollard, Neal Miller, and several colleagues. This theory proposes that aggression, rather
than occurring spontaneously for no reason, is a response to the frustration of some goal-directed behavior
by an outside source. Goals may include such basic
needs as food, water, sleep, sex, love, and recognition.
Contributions to frustration-aggression research in the
1960s by Leonard Berkowitz further established that an
environmental stimulus must produce not just frustration
but anger in order for aggression to follow, and that the
anger can be the result of stimuli other than frustrating
situations (such as verbal abuse).
In contrast to instinct theories, social learning theory focuses on aggression as a learned behavior. This approach stresses the roles that social influences, such as
models and reinforcement, play in the acquisition of aggressive behavior. The work of Albert Bandura, a
prominent researcher in the area of social learning, has
demonstrated that aggressive behavior is learned through
a combination of modeling and reinforcement. Children
are influenced by observing aggressive behavior in their
parents and peers, and in cultural forms such as movies,
television, and comic books. While research has shown
that the behavior of live models has a more powerful effect than that of characters on screen, film and television
are still pervasive influences on behavior. Quantitative
studies have found that network television averages 10
violent acts per hour, while on-screen deaths in movies
such as Robocop and Die Hard range from 80 to 264.
Some have argued that this type of violence does not
cause violence in society and may even have a beneficial
cathartic effect. However, correlations have been found
between the viewing of violence and increased interpersonal aggression, both in childhood and, later, in adolescence. In addition to its modeling function, viewing vio-

lence can elicit aggressive behavior by increasing the
viewer’s arousal, desensitizing viewers to violence, reducing restraints on aggressive behavior, and distorting
views about conflict resolution.
As Bandura’s research demonstrates, what is crucial
in the modeling of violence—both live and on screen—is
seeing not only that aggressive behavior occurs, but also
that it works. If the violent parent, playmate, or superhero is rewarded rather than punished for violent behavior, that behavior is much more likely to serve as a positive model: a child will more readily imitate a model
who is being rewarded for an act than one who is being
punished. In this way, the child can learn without actually being rewarded or punished himself—a concept
known as vicarious learning.
The findings of social learning theory address not
only the acquisition, but also the instigation, of aggression. Once one has learned aggressive behavior, what environmental circumstances will activate it? The most obvious are adverse events, including not only frustration
of desires but also verbal and physical assaults. Modeling, which is important in the learning of aggression, can
play a role in instigating it as well. Seeing other people
act in an aggressive manner, especially if they are not
punished for it, can remove inhibitions against acting aggressively oneself. If the modeled behavior is rewarded,
the reward can act vicariously as an incentive for aggression in the observer. In addition, modeled aggression
may serve as a source of emotional arousal.
Some aggression is motivated by reward: aggressive
behavior can be a means of obtaining what one wants.
Another motive for aggression is, paradoxically, obedience. People have committed many violent acts at the
bidding of another, in both military and civilian life.
Other possible motivating factors include stressors in
one’s physical environment, such as crowding, noise,
and temperature, and the delusions resulting from mental illness. In addition to the acquisition and instigation
of aggression, various types of reinforcement, both direct
and vicarious, help determine whether aggression is
maintained or discontinued.
Researchers have attempted to learn whether certain
childhood characteristics are predictors of aggression in
adults. Traits found to have connections with aggressive
behavior in adulthood include maternal deprivation, lack
of identification with one’s father, pyromania, cruelty to
animals, and parental abuse. A 22-year longitudinal
study found patterns of aggression to be established by
the age of eight—the aggressive behavior of both boys
and girls at this age was a strong predictor of their future
aggression as adults. Other factors cited in the same
study include the father’s upward social mobility, the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

21

Agression

sports, a process referred to in psychoanalytic theory as
catharsis. Biological theories of aggression have also
been advanced by ethologists, researchers who study the
behavior of animals in their natural environments. Several
have advanced views about aggression in humans based
on their observations of animal behavior. The view of aggression as an innate instinct common to both humans
and animals was popularized in three widely read books
of the 1960s—On Aggression by Konrad Lorenz, The
Territorial Imperative by Robert Ardrey, and The Naked
Ape by Desmond Morris. Like Freud’s Thanatos, the aggressive instinct postulated by these authors builds up
spontaneously—with or without outside provocation—
until it is likely to be discharged with minimal or no
provocation from outside stimuli.

Aging

child’s degree of identification with parents, and preference for violent television programs.
See also Television and aggression
Further Reading
Aggression and Peacefulness in Humans and Other Primates.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Aggressive Behavior: Current Perspectives. New York: Plenum
Press, 1994.
Bandura, Albert. Aggression: A Social Learning Analysis. New
York: Prentice-Hall, 1973.
Of Mice and Women: Aspects of Female Aggression. New
York: Academic Press, 1992.

Aging
The process by which the human body changes
and matures over time, especially the means by
which dying cells are not replaced in sufficient
numbers to maintain current levels of function; the
process by which human behavior alters with time.

Psychological studies of aging populations began in
earnest in the late nineteenth century when psychologists
found that mental abilities deteriorated with age. These
abilities included memory and the types of mental performance measured in IQ tests. In some individuals, verbal abilities were shown to deteriorate with advanced age,
although at a slower rate than other skills; with others,
verbal abilities, especially vocabulary, may increase with
age. Such data have often been corroborated in tests with
chimpanzees, where younger animals perform better in
tests of memory and other such areas of mental functioning. For decades, then, it was assumed that the physical
deterioration of the body, so evident in the elderly, was
surely matched by a similar decline in the mind.
Recent studies, however, have begun to cast doubt
on these assumptions. One area where current research
has disproved a long-held belief about the aging of the
mind is in the death of neurons, formally thought to necessarily lead to diminished mental functioning. It is now
known that the brain has far more neurons than it could
ever use, and that as they die their functions are taken
over by nearby neurons. Scientists have recently proven
that while abilities like short-term memory and performing certain specific tasks within a time constraint often
deteriorate after mid-life, other areas of mental activity,
such as wisdom and judgment, become more acute and
powerful. Still other studies have shown that brains in
older subjects are capable of performing many tasks as
quickly and efficiently as brains in younger subjects, although the tasks are performed using different areas of
22

the brain. For instance, research conducted at the Georgia Institute of Technology studied typing speeds in accomplished typists of college age and another group in
their sixties. Common sense suggests that the older typists would perform less well because of decreased handeye coordination and slower reaction time. Surprisingly, both groups typed at the same speed. Researchers explained the results by pointing out that the assumptions
about dexterity and response time were correct, but that
the older typists had made clever, efficient adjustments,
such as making fewer finger movements and to read
ahead in the text, to compensate for their deficiency in
those areas.
Fifty seems to be a crucial age in determining the
brain’s pattern of aging. Once a person has passed that
age, brain functioning and mental ability are thought to
be determined by essentially three factors: mental habits,
chronic disease, and the mind’s flexibility.
The elderly populations of many Western countries
are the fastest growing segment of the population. In the
United States, it is estimated that by the year 2030 there
will be 50 million persons over age 65. Among the elderly,
the fastest growing population is people over 85. Such demographic data will continue to focus attention on the
process of aging and the psychological problems faced by
the elderly. Perhaps the most common psychological disorder often associated with aging is depression. According to the National Institute of Mental Health, depression
among the elderly range from 10 to 65 percent. Suicide
rates among the elderly have been increasing at alarming
rates. A study conducted by the federal government found
that between 1980 and 1986, suicides by persons aged 65
and older increased 23 percent among white men, 42 percent among black men, and 17 percent among white
women. The highest suicide rates are for white men over
age 85. The elderly comprise about 13 percent of the nation’s population (one in eight Americans) and account for
about 20 percent of all suicides.
With the increase in the aging population, more
focus is being placed on geriatric mental health issues,
including disabilities since more than half the population
has at least one, chronic health problems, living alone or
in assisted housing, depression, loss, pain, Alzheimer’s
and dementia, among others. The nation’s 78 million
American baby boomers are expected to crave more vitality and longer life, which could contribute to a healthier version of aging.
Further Reading
Cadoff, Jennifer. “Feel Your Best at Every Age.” McCall’s
(February 1994): 128.
Kahn, Ada, and Jan Fawcett, eds. The Encyclopedia of Mental
Health. New York: Facts on File, 1993.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Mary Ainsworth

Average annual growth rate of the elderly population. (Dana Hansen. Gale Group. Reproduced with permission.)

Schrof, Joannie M. “Brain Power.” U.S. News and World Report (28 November 1994): 88+.
White, Kristin. “How the Mind Ages: Aging: Getting It Right.”
Psychology Today (November/December 1993): 38+.

1913American psychologist specializing in the study of
infant attachment.

Ainsworth began her career teaching at the University of Toronto before joining the Canadian Women’s
Army Corp in 1942 during World War II. After a brief
period of post-war government service as the superintendent of Women’s Rehabilitation in the Canadian Department of Veteran’s Affairs, Ainsworth returned to Toronto
to teach personality psychology and conduct research in
the assessment of security. She married Leonard
Ainsworth in 1950. Since he was a graduate student in
the same department in which she held a faculty appointment, the couple decided to move to London where he
could finish his degree at University College.

Mary D. Satler Ainsworth graduated from the University of Toronto in 1935 and earned her Ph.D. in psychology from that same institution in 1939. She is best
known for her landmark work in assessing the security
of infant attachment and linking attachment security to
aspects of maternal caregiving.

In England Mary Ainsworth began work at the Tavistock Clinic on a research project investigating the effects of early maternal separation on children’s personality development. The project director, John Bowlby,
had studied children’s reactions to separations during the
war years in England, and brought an evolutionary and

Mary Ainsworth

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

23

Alcohol dependence and abuse

ethological perspective to understanding the problems of
attachment, separation, and loss. Her work with Bowlby
brought Ainsworth’s earlier interest in security into the
developmental realm, and she planned to conduct a longitudinal study of mother-infant interaction in a natural
setting at her earliest opportunity.
That opportunity came when Ainsworth’s husband
accepted a position in the East African Institute of Social
Research in Kampala, Uganda. It was in Uganda that
Mary Ainsworth studied mothers and infants in their natural environment, observing and recording as much as
possible, and analyzing and publishing the data years
later after joining the faculty at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.
Based on her original observations in Uganda and
subsequent studies in Baltimore, Ainsworth concluded
that there are qualitatively distinct patterns of attachment
that evolve between infants and their mothers over the
opening years of life. Although a majority of these patterns are marked by comfort and security, some are tense
or conflicted, and Ainsworth found evidence suggesting
that these relationships were related to the level of responsiveness that mothers showed toward their infants
from the earliest months. In one study she found mothers
who responded more quickly to their infants’ cries at
three months were more likely to have developed secure
attachments with their babies by one year.
How could the security of a relationship be measured? Ainsworth and her colleagues devised a system
for assessing individual differences in infants’ reactions
to a series of separations and reunions with their mothers. This method, the “Strange Situation,” has become
one of the most widely used procedures in child development research.

tressed at her departure, only to seek simultaneously
comfort and distance from the mother on her return by
such behaviors as crying and reaching to be held and
then attempting to leave once picked up.
The development of this procedure has spawned an
enormous body of literature examining the development
of mother-child attachment, the role of attachments to
other caregivers, and the correlates and consequences of
secure and insecure attachments. Ainsworth’s work has
not been without controversy. Attempts to replicate her
link between response to early crying and later attachment have met with mixed success, and there is much
debate about the origins of children’s reactions in the
Strange Situation. Still, Mary Ainsworth has made a lasting contribution to the study of children’s affective
growth and the role of supportive relationships in many
aspects of development.
See also Bowlby, John
Doreen Arcus
Further Reading
Ainsworth, M. Infancy in Uganda: Infant Care and the Growth
of Love. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1967.
Ainsworth, M., M. C. Blehar, E. Waters, and S. Wall. Patterns
of Attachment: A Psychological Study of the Strange Situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1978.
Karen, Robert. “Becoming Attached: What Experiences in Infancy Will Allow Children to Thrive Emotionally and to
Come to Feel That the World of People Is a Positive
Place?” Atlantic 265 (February 1990): 35+.

In this scenario, an observer takes a mother and
child of about one year to an unfamiliar room containing
toys. There are a series of separations and reunions. For
example, mother and child are alone in the room for several minutes, the observer re-enters, remains, and after a
few minutes, the mother leaves and returns after a few
more minutes. Both observer and mother may comfort
the distressed child.

The abuse of alcohol in any of its various forms,
exhibited by repeated episodes of excessive drinking often to the point of physical illness during
which increasing amounts of alcohol must be consumed to achieve the desired effects.

Ainsworth found that key individual differences
among children are revealed by the child’s reaction to
the mother’s return. She categorized these responses into
three major types: (A) Anxious/avoidant—the child may
not be distressed at the mother’s departure and may
avoid or turn away from her on return; (B) Securely attached—the child is distressed by mother’s departure
and easily soothed by her on her return; (C) Anxious/resistant—the child may stay extremely close to the mother during the first few minutes and become highly dis-

The American Psychiatric Association ranks alcohol dependence and abuse into three categories (what society normally thinks of as “alcoholics”): 1) individuals
who consume alcohol regularly, usually daily, in large
amounts 2) those who consume alcohol regularly and
heavily, but, unlike the first group, have the control to
confine their excessive drinking to times when there are
fewer social consequences, such as the weekend and 3)
drinkers defined by the APA who endure long periods of

24

Alcohol dependence and
abuse

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Other psychologists categorize alcohol dependence
and abuse into “species.” There are several species currently recognized by some in the medical community, including alpha, a minor, controllable dependence; beta, a
dependence that has brought on physical complaints; epsilon, a dependence that occurs in sprees or binges;
gamma, a severe biological dependence; and delta, an advanced form of gamma where the drinker has great difficulty going 24 to 48 hours without getting drunk. It should
be noted, however, that many psychologists dispute these
particular subdivisions on the grounds that the original
data behind their creation has been shown to be flawed.
Alcohol dependence and abuse in adolescents and
persons under 30 years of age is often accompanied by
abuse of other substances, including marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines, and nicotine, the primary drug in
cigarettes. These conditions may also be accompanied
by depression, but current thinking is unclear as to
whether depression is a symptom or a cause of alcohol
dependence and abuse. Heredity appears to play a major
role in the contraction of this disorder, with recent discoveries of genes that influence vulnerability to alcoholism. Studies of adopted children who are genetically
related to alcohol abusers but raised in families free of
the condition suggest that environment plays a smaller
role in alcoholism’s onset than heredity. Recent studies
suggest that between 10 to 12 percent of the adult population of the United States suffers from some form of alcohol abuse or dependence.
Alcohol dependence and abuse typically appear in
males and females at different ages. Males are more likely to begin heavy drinking as teenagers, while females
are more likely to begin drinking in their mid-to-late
twenties. In males, the disease is likely to progress rapidly; debilitating symptoms in females can take years to
develop. According to the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, 14 percent of males aged 18 to 29
report symptoms of alcohol dependence, and 20 percent
revealed that their drinking has brought about negative
consequences in their lives. As age progresses, these figures drop steadily. In females aged 18 to 29, similar statistics demonstrated that 5 to 6 percent admit to symptoms of dependence and that this number stays essentially the same until age 49, at which point it plummets to
one percent. Females reporting negative consequences of
drinking, however, begins at 12 percent but drops to statistical insignificance after age 60.

QUESTIONS TO ASK BEFORE
ALCOHOL OR SUBSTANCE
ABUSE TREATMENT
The following key issues should be considered in
determining which option is the most appropriate for
given circumstances:
• How severe is the substance abuse problem and is
there any evidence (e.g., suicide attempts) to suggest
that there may be other problems (e.g., depression)?
• What are the credentials of the staff and what form(s)
of therapy (e.g., family, group, medications) are to be
used?
• How will the family be involved in the treatment and
how long will it be from treatment entry to discharge?
Is there a follow-up phase of treatment?
• How will the adolescent continue his/her education
during the treatment?
• How much of the treatment will our insurance cover
and how much will we need to pay “out of pocket?”

A key physiological component of alcohol dependence is what is referred to as neurological adaptation,
or, more commonly, tolerance, whereby the brain adapts
itself to the level of alcohol contained in the body and in
the bloodstream. This process occurs over time as the
drinker drinks more regularly while increasing intake in
order to achieve the desired effect. In some cases, however, high levels of tolerance to alcohol is an inborn
physical trait, independent of drinking history.
There is considerable debate as to the exact nature of
alcoholism (the biological disease) and alcohol dependence and abuse (the psychological disorders). The disease model, which has been embraced by physicians and
Alcoholics Anonymous for more than 50 years, is undergoing reexamination, particularly for its view that total abstinence is the only method for recovery. Many psychologists now believe that some victims of alcohol dependence
and abuse can safely return to controlled drinking without
plunging back into self-destructive binges. Experiments
have been conducted that indicate the consumption of a
few drinks after a lengthy period of abstinence can lessen
the resolve to remain totally abstinent, but that a devastating return to abusive drinking is not the inevitable result.
In fact, some psychologists contend that the binge drinking that occurs after initially “falling off the wagon” is less
a result of the return of alcohol to the body than to the
feelings of uselessness and self-pity that typically accompany such a failure to keep a promise to oneself.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

25

Alcohol dependence and abuse

sobriety before going on a binge of alcohol consumption.
A binge can last a night, a weekend, a week, or longer.
People in the latter two categories often resist seeking
help because the control they exercise over their intake
usually allows them to maintain a normal daily schedule
and function well at work or at school aside from binges.

Alienation

CHILDREN OF ALCOHOLICS
A number of researchers have studied children of
alcoholics (COAs) and their counterparts, children of
non-alcoholic parents (nonCOAs). These points summarize their findings:
COAs and non-COAs are most likely to differ in
cognitive performance: scores on tests of abstract and
conceptual reasoning and verbal skills were lower
among children of alcoholic fathers than among children of non-alcoholic fathers in one study (Ervin, Little,
Streissguth, and Beck).
A research team (Johnson and Rolf) found that both
COAs and mothers of COAs were found to underestimate the child’s abilities.
School records indicate that COAs are more likely to
repeat grades, fail to graduate from high school, and require referral to the school psychologist than their nonCOA classmates. (Miller and Jang; Knop and Teasdale)
Researchers (West and Prinz) found that COAs exhibit behavior problems such as lying, stealing, fighting,
truancy, and are often diagnosed as having conduct disorders.

Although it may be premature to suggest that a paradigm shift has occurred in the psychological community
regarding alcohol dependence and abuse, many researchers do in fact believe that the disease model, requiring total, lifelong abstinence, no longer adequately
addresses the wide variety of disorders related to excessive, harmful intake of alcohol. It is important to note,
however, that the human body has no physical requirement for alcohol and that persons with a history of uncontrollable drinking should be very careful in experimenting with alcohol after having achieved a hard-won
abstinence. Other factors to keep in mind are problems
alcohol can cause to the fetuses of pregnant women, a
condition known as fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS).
Some researchers believe that children born with FAS
are prone to learning disabilities, behavior problems, and
cognitive deficits, although others feel the evidence is insufficient to establish a reliable link between these problems and FAS. Alcohol also has a negative effect on
human organs, especially the liver, and a lifetime of
drinking can cause terminal illnesses of the liver, stomach, and brain. Finally, drunk driving is a tremendous
problem in the United States, as are violent crimes committed by people who are under the influence of alcohol.
Findings for alcohol expectancies among school-age
children indicate increasingly positive alcohol expectancies across the grade levels. By fourth grade children
26

tended to believe that use of alcohol led to positive outcomes, such as higher levels of acceptance and liking by
peers and a good mood with positive feelings about oneself. Findings also indicate that 25% of fourth graders
studied reported feeling at least some peer pressure to
consume alcoholic beverages; this figure increased to
60% among seventh graders
Dr. John Ewing developed a four-question test,
known as the “CAGE” test, that therapists and the medical community frequently use as a first step to evaluate
alcohol dependence and/or abuse. The test takes its name
from a key word in each question: 1) Have you ever felt
you should Cut down on your drinking? 2) Have people
Annoyed you by criticizing your drinking? 3) Have you
ever felt bad or Guilty about your drinking? And 4) Have
you ever had a drink first thing in the morning to steady
your nerves or to get rid of a hangover (Eye opener)?
One yes suggests a possible alcohol problem.
Treatment modalities vary. Professionals frequently
employ a combination of modalities. Studies indicate
cognitive behavioral therapies improve self-control and
social skills. Behavioral and group therapy have also
proven effective. Self-help programs include Alcoholics
Anonymous, Smart Recovery, and Rational Recovery. In
some cases medications designed to ease drug cravings or
block the effects of alcohol are prescribed. To reduce
cravings, even acupuncture is being tried. The managed
care environment has contributed to a belief that treatment should occur in the least restrictive settings that provide safety and effectiveness. Treatment settings vary
from hospitalization to partial hospital care to outpatient
treatment to self-help groups.
See also Addiction/Addictive Personality; Self-help
groups
Further Reading
Barlow, David H. and V. Mark Durand, eds. Abnormal Psychology. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1995.
Knapp, Caroline. “My Passion for Liquor.” New Woman (August 1995): 80-83.
Noble, Ernest P. “Moderate Drinking Is Not for People in Recovery.” Addiction Letter (September 1995): 1-2.
Sheed, Wilfrid. “Down in the Valley.” Psychology Today (November 1995): 26-28.
Szpir, Michael. “Alcoholism, Personality, and Dopamine.”
American Scientist (September 1995): 425-26.

Alienation
The state of being emotionally separated from others and from one’s own feelings.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Alienation

Compound of the Branch Davidians in Waco, Texas. Feelings of alienation sometimes lead people to form small, close-knit
groups such as cults. (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with permission.)

Alienation is a powerful feeling of isolation and
loneliness, and stems from a variety of causes. Alienation may occur in response to certain events or situations in society or in one’s personal life. Examples of
events that may lead to an individual’s feeling of alienation include the loss of a charismatic group leader, or
the discovery that a person who served as a role model
has serious shortcomings. Examples of personal events
are a death in the family, a job change, divorce, or leaving home for the first time. Although most people may
find that such occurrences trigger temporary feelings of
disillusionment or loneliness, a small percentage will be
unable to overcome these events, and will feel hopelessly
adrift and alone.
Many sociologists have observed and commented
upon an increase in this feeling of alienation among
young people since the 1960s. They attribute this alienation to a variety of societal conditions: the rapid
changes in society during this period, the increase in alcohol and drug abuse, violence in the media, or the lack
of communal values in the culture at large. Some sociologists observe that individuals become alienated when
they perceive government, employment, or educational

institutions as cold and impersonal, unresponsive to
those who need their services. Entire groups may experience alienation—for example, ethnic minorities or residents of inner city neighborhoods who feel the opportunities and advantages of mainstream society are beyond
their reach.
Feeling separated from society is not the only way a
person experiences alienation: sometimes the individual
feels alienation as disharmony with his or her true self.
This condition develops when a person accepts societal
expectations (to take over a family business, for example) that are counter to the person’s true goals, feelings,
or desires (perhaps to be a teacher). He may appear to be
successful in the role others expect him to assume, but
his true wish is hidden, leaving him feeling deeply conflicted and alone.
In the workplace, jobs have become increasingly
specialized since the 1700s and the Industrial Revolution. Workers may see little connection between the tasks
they perform and the final product or service, and may
thus feel intense loneliness while in the midst of a busy
work environment. In the 1840s, American writer and
philosopher Henry David Thoreau (1817-1862) observed

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

27

Gordon Willard Allport

that “the mass of men lead lives of quiet desperation.
What is called resignation is confirmed desperation.”
Thoreau dealt with his own feelings of alienation by retreating to a solitary, simple life on the banks of Walden
Pond in rural Massachusetts. He felt less isolated there—
even though he lived in solitude—than when he lived in
a town, surrounded by people. When living in town, his
feelings of alienation confronted him daily, since his activities did not reflect his true feelings and desires.
Alienation is expressed differently by different people. Some become withdrawn and lethargic; others may
react with hostility and violence; still others may become disoriented, rejecting traditional values and behavior by adopting an outlandish appearance and erratic behavior patterns. As society undergoes rapid changes, and
traditional values and behavioral standards are challenged, some people find little they can believe in and so
have difficulty constructing a reality in which they can
find a place for themselves. It is for this reason that social and cultural beliefs play such an important role in
bringing about or averting a feeling of alienation.
Psychologists help people cope with feelings of
alienation by developing exercises or designing specific
tasks to help the person become more engaged in society.
For example, by identifying the alienated individual’s
true feelings, the psychologist may suggest a volunteer
activity or a job change to bring the individual into contact with society in a way that has meaning for him or her.

Jackson, Richard. “Alone in the Crowd: Breaking the Isolation
of Childhood.” School Library Journal (November 1995):
24.
Upton, Julia. “A Generation of Refugees.” The Catholic World
(September-October 1995): 204+.

See also Loss and grief

Gordon Willard Allport
1897-1967
American humanist psychologist who developed a
personality theory that emphasized individuality.

Gordon Willard Allport was one of the great personality theorists of the twentieth century. His work was
a synthesis of individual personality traits and the traditional psychology of William James, which emphasized
psychological traits that are common among humans. He
also examined complex social interactions. As a humanistic psychologist, he opposed both behavioral and psychoanalytical theories of psychology. Above all, Allport
believed in the uniqueness of the individual. A prolific
and gifted writer, he was the recipient of numerous professional awards.

Foster, Hal. “Cult of Despair.” New York Times (30 December
1994): A3.

Allport, born in 1897 in Montezuma, Indiana, was
the youngest of four sons in the family of John Edwards
and Nellie Edith (Wise) Allport. He was educated in
Cleveland, Ohio, where the family moved when he was
six years old. John Allport was a physician with a clinic
in the family home and, as they were growing up, his
sons assisted him in his practice. Gordon Allport’s mother, a former school teacher, maintained a home environment that emphasized religion and intellectual development. As a teenager, Allport ran his own printing business
and edited his high school newspaper. Following graduation in 1915, scholarships enabled him to join his brother
Floyd at Harvard College. Although his education was interrupted for military service during the First World War,
Allport earned his A.B. degree in 1919, with majors in
philosophy and economics. Following a year of teaching
English and sociology at Robert College in Istanbul,
Turkey, Allport returned to Harvard with a fellowship to
study psychology. He was influenced both by his brother
Floyd and by the noted experimental psychologist Hugo
Münsterberg. He coauthored his first publication, “Personality Traits: Their Classification and Measurement,”
with his brother in 1921. Allport received his M.A. degree in 1921 and his Ph.D. in 1922, for his study of personality traits under the direction of Herbert S. Langfeld.

Guinness, Alma, ed. ABCs of the Human Mind. Pleasantville,
NY: Reader’s Digest Association, 1990.

A Sheldon Traveling Fellowship enabled Allport to
spend two years studying in Berlin and Hamburg, Ger-

Some have proposed treating the epidemic of alienation among America’s young people by fostering social
solutions rather than individual solutions. One such social
solution is the idea of communitarianism, a movement
begun early in the 1990s by Amitai Etzioni, a sociology
professor from George Washington University in Washington, D.C. Etzioni became a popular speaker and writer
in the mid-1990s with the publication of his book, The
Spirit of Community. Etzioni advocates a return to community values to replace the rampant alienation of contemporary culture, education to reinforce shared societal
morals focusing on family values, and strictly enforcing
anti-crime measures. This movement has met serious criticism, however; civil libertarian groups are concerned
about communitarian beliefs that certain rights can and
should be restricted for the good of the community.
Further Reading
D’Antonio, Michael. “I or We.” Mother Jones (May-June
1994): 20+.

28

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Gordon Willard Allport

many, and in Cambridge, England. He then returned to
Harvard as an instructor in social ethics from 1924 to
1926. Allport married Ada Lufkin Gould in 1925. Their
son, Robert Bradlee Allport, grew up to become a pediatrician. After four years as an assistant professor of psychology at Dartmouth College, Allport returned to Harvard where he remained for the rest of his career. He became an associate professor of psychology in 1937 and a
full professor in 1942. He served as chairman of the Psychology Department and helped found Harvard’s Department of Social Relations. In 1939 he was elected president of the American Psychological Association and, in
1964, received the Distinguished Scientific Contribution
Award of that society. In 1963, he was awarded the Gold
Medal of the American Psychological Foundation.

Publishes theory of personality
Allport’s first major book, Personality: A Psychological Interpretation (1937), distinguished between traits
that are common to many people, such as assertiveness,
and personal dispositions which are traits that are characteristic of the individual. The latter were classified according to their degree of influence on an individual personality. Allport also identified how individuals develop
self-awareness throughout childhood and adolescence.
One of Allport’s most important concepts, functional autonomy, encompassed his theories of motivation. Finally,
he attempted to define the mature personality. Personality: A Psychological Interpretation remained the standard
text on personality theory for many years. In 1961, following years of study and research, Allport published a
major revision of this work, Pattern and Growth in Personality. He also helped to develop methods of personality assessment, including the A-S Reaction Study (1928),
with his brother Floyd Allport.

Examines the nature of prejudice
Allport was a man of diverse interests. During
World War II, as a member of the National Research
Council, he began studying the social problem of spreading rumors. In 1947 he published The Psychology of
Rumor with Leo Postman. Allport also was concerned
with racial and religious prejudice. His 1954 book, The
Nature of Prejudice, was a milestone study. As a visiting
consultant at the University of Natal in South Africa in
1956, Allport predicted that the white supremacist cultures of both South Africa and the American South
would be overthrown. Like his predecessor William
James, Allport also examined the psychology of religion
in The Individual and his Religion: A Psychological Interpretation (1950), in which he warned of the prejudices that could be fostered by institutionalized religions.

Gordon W. Allport (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

During his career, Allport published 12 books and
more than 200 papers on psychology and held important
positions in American and foreign psychological associations. Allport was editor of the Journal of Abnormal
and Social Psychology from 1937 until 1949. Boston
University awarded him an honorary L.H.D. degree in
1958. He also held honorary doctorates from Ohio Wesleyan University, Colby College, and the University of
Durham in England. He died of lung cancer in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1967.
See also Personality development; Prejudice and
discrimination; Religion and psychology
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Allport, G. W. “Autobiography.” In A History of Psychology in
Autobiography, edited by E. Boring and G. Lindzey.
Boston: Beacon Press, 1967.
Evans, Richard I. Gordon Allport, the Man and his Ideas. New
York: Dutton, 1971.
Maddi, Salvatore R. and Paul T. Costa. Humanism in Personalogy: Allport, Maslow, and Murray. Chicago: AldineAtherton, 1972.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

29

Alzheimer’s disease

Further Reading

Alzheimer’s disease
An irreversible, progressive condition in which
nerve cells in the brain degenerate, and the size of
the brain decreases.

Alzheimer’s disease is the most common degenerative brain disorder, although onset of the disease is rare
before the age of 60. After that age, the incidence of
Alzheimer’s disease increases steadily, and more than
one-quarter of all individuals above the age of 85 have
this disease. In addition, Alzheimer’s disease is the cause
of about three-quarters of all cases of dementia in individuals above the age of 65. General interest and research focusing on the cause and treatment of this condition have grown in recent years because the number of
elderly persons in the population is increasing.
The cause of Alzheimer’s disease is not known, but
several theories of causality have been advanced. These
theories propose genetic, environmental, viral, immunological, biochemical, and other causes for the disease.
The specific features of Alzheimer’s disease vary from
individual to individual, but the general course of the
disease is fairly consistent in most cases. The symptoms
of the disease tend to be more severe at night. The first
stage of Alzheimer’s disease is usually forgetfulness, accompanied by some anxiety and mild depression. This
usually develops into a more serious loss of memory, especially of recent events, moderate spatial and temporal
disorientation, loss of ability to concentrate, aphasia,
and increased anxiety. This set of symptoms is usually
followed by profound spatial and temporal disorientation, delusions, hallucinations, incontinence, general
physical decline, and death.
See also Dementia

Edwards, Allen. When Memory Fails. New York: Plenum, 1994.
Gregg, Daphna. Alzheimer’s Disease. Boston: Harvard Medical School Health Publications, 1994.

American Academy of Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry
The American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry (AACAP) represents over 6,500 child and
adolescent psychiatrists, all of whom have at least five
years of additional training beyond medical school in the
fields of general and child and adolescent psychiatry.
The members of the Academy actively research, diagnose, and treat psychiatric disorders affecting children
and adolescents and their families and support their activities through a variety of programs.
The Academy was established in 1953 as the American Academy of Child Psychiatry with fewer than 100
members. Today the AACAP is a dynamic, growing organization whose mission is to direct and respond quickly to new developments in the health care environment,
particularly as they affect the needs of children, adolescents, and their families.
The Academy sponsors over 45 committees which
work to increase the areas of knowledge for Academy
members and the public, and to disseminate information,
including position statements on various issues such as
adolescent psychiatric hospitalization, pregnancy prevention, and substance abuse.
The Academy’s strong commitment to furthering
the understanding and treatment of children and adolescents is also reflected in the wide range of their activities, which include publishing the bi-monthly Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and a quarterly Newsletter; promoting support for
research careers; providing a national continuing medical education program and participating in the American Medical Association regarding innovations in treatment; and providing public information in the form of
Facts for Families, a collection of informational sheets
providing the most up-to-date material discussing current psychiatric issues concerning children, adolescents,
and their families.
Further Information

Brain tissue damaged by Alzheimer’s disease. (Photo by
Cecil Fox/Science Source. National Audubon Society
Collection/Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

30

American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 3615
Wisconsin Ave., N.W., Washington, DC 20016, (202)
966–7300. www.aacap.org/about/introduction.html.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

U.S. federal legislation (PL 101-336; 42 U.S.C.
12101) enacted in 1990 and designed to prohibit
certain forms of discrimination against individuals
with disabilities.

In 1990, approximately 40 million Americans could
be classified as having one or more physical or mental
disabilities. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
was enacted to legally address the widespread and serious social problem of discrimination against these individuals in employment, housing, public accommodations, education, transportation, communication, public
service, and other areas. In addition to establishing enforceable standards in reference to discrimination against
individuals with disabilities and ensuring that the federal
government enforces those standards, the intent of this
legislation was to provide a clear national mandate for
the elimination of discrimination against individuals
with disabilities and to allow these individuals into the
economic and social mainstream of American life.
See also Disability
Further Reading
Bowe, Frank. Equal Rights for Americans with Disabilities.
New York: Franklin Watts, 1992.

Ames Room
Specially constructed space that demonstrates aspects of visual perception.

People make sense out of visual scenes by relying on
various cues. The Ames Room is a specially constructed
space that demonstrates the power of these cues. Normally, people use monocular depth cues such as relative size
and height in the visual plane as indicators of depth. If
two people of similar size stand a distance part, the one
closer to the viewer appears larger. Similarly, the person
farther away appears higher in the visual plane.

Amnesia
A partial or total loss of memory.

There are numerous causes of amnesia, including
stroke, injury to the brain, surgery, alcoholism, encephalitis, and electroconvulsive therapy. Contrary to
the popular notion of amnesia—in which a person suffers a severe blow to the head, for example, and cannot
recall his or her past life and experiences—the principal
symptom of amnesia is the inability to retain new information, beginning at the point at which the amnesia
began. The capacity to recall past experiences may vary,
depending on the severity of the amnesia.
There are two types of amnesia: retrograde and anterograde. Retrograde amnesia refers to the loss of memory of one’s past, and can vary from person to person.
Some retain virtually full recall of things that happened
prior to the onset of amnesia; others forget only their recent past, and still others lose all memory of their past
lives. Anterograde amnesia refers to the inability to recall events or facts introduced since the amnesia began.
Amnesiacs often appear perfectly normal. Motor
skills such as tying laces and bows and bike riding are
retained, as is the ability to read and comprehend the
meaning of words. Because of this phenomenon, researchers have suggested that there is more than one area
of the brain used to store memory. General knowledge
and perceptual skills may be stored in a memory separate
from the one used to store personal facts.

An Ames Room is constructed to look like a normal
room. In reality, the floor slants up on one side and, at
the same time, slopes up from front to back. Finally, the
back wall is slanted so that one side is closer to the viewer than the other. The figure below shows a top view of
the shape of the room and the spot from which the viewer looks at the scene.

The most famous study of amnesia involves a patient
called H.M., who in 1953 underwent brain surgery designed to treat his epilepsy. Following the surgery, he
could recall all the events of his past life up until three
weeks before the operation. However, H.M. could no
longer function normally because he had lost the ability to
learn new facts and associations. For example, he could
not recognize his doctor from day to day or hour to hour.

If one person stands at the back right corner of the
room (Person B), and another person at the left corner (Per-

Childhood amnesia, a term coined by Anna Freud
in the late 1940s, refers to the fact that most people cannot

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

31

Amnesia

Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA)

son A), Person A should appear somewhat smaller than Person B because Person A is farther from the viewer. However, because the room is constructed so that the back wall
looks normal, the viewer has no depth cues and Person A
appears unusually small, while Person B appears very large.
If a person moves from one corner to the other, he gives the
illusion of shrinking or growing as he moves. That is, the
cues that people normally use for size are so powerful that
viewers see things that could not possibly be true.

American Psychiatric Association

recall childhood experiences during the first three to five
years of life. It has been suggested that this type of amnesia occurs because children and adults organize memories
in different ways based on their brain’s physical development. Others believe children begin remembering facts
and events once they have accumulated enough experience to be able to relate experiences to each other.
See also Fugue
Further Reading
Atkinson, Rita L.; Richard C. Atkinson; Edward E. Smith; and
Ernest R. Hilgard. Introduction to Psychology . 9th ed.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
Bolles, Edmund Blair. Remembering and Forgetting: An Inquiry into the Nature of Memory. New York: Walker and
Co., 1988.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. 12th ed. Glenview,
IL: Scott, Foresman, 1989.

The American Psychiatric Association supports psychiatrists and their service to patients through publications such as the American Journal of Psychiatry, the
oldest specialty journal in the United States, and the Psychiatric News, the Association’s official newsletter, as
well as numerous books, journals, and reports. The Association’s annual meeting attracts more than 15,000 attendees and features hundreds of sessions and presenters.
Additionally, the Association schedules more than 200
meetings each year among its councils, committees, and
task forces to advance the cause of mental health. The
American Psychiatric Association also offers a comprehensive continuing medical education program to its
members. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), an authoritative reference
work, is published by American Psychiatric Association.
See also Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
Further Information
American Psychiatric Association. 1400 K Street, NW, Washington, D.C. 20005, (202) 682–6000.

American Psychiatric
Association
A national medical society whose approximately
40,500 members—physicians and medical students—specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of
mental and emotional disorders.

The oldest medical specialty society in the United
States, the American Psychiatric Association was founded in October 1844, when thirteen physicians who specialized in the treatment of mental and emotional disorders met in Philadelphia and founded the Association of
Medical Superintendents of American Institutions for the
Insane. (It is interesting to note that this forerunner of the
American Psychiatric Association preceded the American
Medical Association, which was founded in 1847.) The
goals of the physicians meeting in Philadelphia were to
communicate professionally, cooperate in the collection
of data, and improve the treatment of the mentally ill.
The American Psychiatric Association’s objectives
are still designed to advance care for people with mental
illnesses: to improve treatment, rehabilitation, and care
of the mentally ill and emotionally disturbed; to promote
research, professional education in psychiatry and allied
fields, and the prevention of psychiatric disabilities; to
advance the standards of psychiatric services and facilities; to foster cooperation among those concerned with
the medical, psychological, social and legal aspects of
mental health; to share psychiatric knowledge with
other practitioners of medicine, scientists, and the public; and to promote the best interests of patients and others actually or potentially using mental health services.
32

American Psychological
Association (APA)
The American Psychological Association (APA)
was founded in July 1892, and by the 1990s, it was both
the world’s largest association of psychologists and the
major organization representing psychology in the United States. APA has 159,000 members and affiliates (students and high school teachers) from around the world.
APA sponsors approximately 50 specialty divisions.
The program of the APA is organized in four directorates, namely Science, Practice, Public Interest, and
Education, all of which contribute to the goal of seeking
ways to increase human wellness through an understanding of behavior. The Science Directorate promotes the
exchange of ideas and research findings through conventions, conferences, publications, and traveling museum
exhibits. It also helps psychologists locate and obtain research funding. The Practice Directorate promotes the
practice of psychology and the availability of psychological care. It lobbies both federal and state legislatures on
issues such as health care reform, regulatory activities
such as state licensure, and public service such as the pro
bono services provided through the Disaster Response
Network. The Public Interest Directorate supports the
application of psychology to the advancement of human
welfare through program and policy development, conference planning, and support of research, training, and

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

APA publishes books as well as more than 24 scientific and professional journals and newsletters, including
APA Monitor and American Psychologist. Since 1970,
PsychINFO, a worldwide computer database, has provided references in psychology and related behavioral
and social sciences. The week-long APA annual convention is the world’s largest meeting of psychologists.
More than 15,000 psychologists attend, and have opportunities to attend the presentation of more than 3,000 papers, lectures, and symposia.
See also American Psychological Society (APS);
National Association for Mental Health; National Institute of Mental Health

Further Information
American Psychological Society. 1010 Vermont Avenue, Suite
1100, Washington, D.C. 20005, (202) 783–2077.

Anaclitic depression
See Depression

Anal stage
See Psychosexual development

Further Information

Anne Anastasi

American Psychological Association. 1200 Seventeenth Street
NW, Washington, D.C. 20036, (202) 336–5500.

American Psychological
Society (APS)
Organization devoted to academic, applied, and
science-oriented psychology.

The American Psychological Society was founded
in 1988 to represent the interests of academic, applied,
and science-oriented psychology and psychologists. The
formation of APS originated from the Assembly for Scientific and Applied Psychology (ASAP), a group that attempted to reform the American Psychological Association (APA) to give the scientists greater representation
and autonomy. As of early 1996, the APS had about
15,000 members.
Headquartered in Washington, D.C., APS prides itself on its strong, committed leadership and minimal
bureaucracy. It publishes two bimonthly journals, Psychological Science and Current Directions in Psychological Science, and produces a monthly newsletter. The
APS holds annual conventions and actively lobbies Congress for funds to support scientifically oriented research
projects in psychology. In 1991, it initiated a national behavioral science research agenda known as the Human
Capital Initiative (HCI). The goal of HCI is to apply the
knowledge gained from scientific psychology to address
such social ills as illiteracy, substance abuse, violence, as
well as mental and physical health.

1908American psychologist instrumental in developing
psychometrics—how psychological traits are influenced, developed, and measured.

In her long and productive career, Anne Anastasi has
produced not only several classic texts in psychology but
has been a major factor in the development of psychology as a quantitative behavioral science. To psychology
professionals, the name Anastasi is synonymous with
psychometrics, since it was she who pioneered understanding how psychological traits are influenced, developed, and measured. In 1987 she was rated by her peers
as the most prominent living woman in psychology in
the English-speaking world.
Anne Anastasi was born December 19, 1908, in New
York City, the only child of Anthony and Theresa Gaudiosi. Her father, who died when she was only one year
old, worked for the New York City Board of Education.
Soon after his death, her mother experienced such a deep
split with her father’s relatives that they would never be a
part of her life. From then on, she was raised by her mother, grandmother, and great uncle. Her mother was compelled to find a job, and eventually she became office manager of one of the largest foreign newspapers in New York,
Il Progresso Italo-Americano. Meanwhile, the precocious
and intelligent young Anastasi was educated at home by
her grandmother, and it was not until the sixth grade that
she entered the public school system. After graduating
from P.S. 33 in the Bronx at the top of her class, she attended Evander Childs High School, but found the entire experience dispiriting and dropped out after two months.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

33

Anne Anastasi

advocacy in areas such as minority affairs, women’s issues, and lesbian and gay concerns. The Education Directorate serves to advance psychology in its work with
educational institutions, professional agencies, and programs and initiatives in education.

Anne Anastasi

Skips high school and discovers psychology
at Barnard College
The dilemma of a 13-year old girl leaving high
school after only two months was solved by an insightful
family friend, Ida Stadie, who suggested that she prepare
to skip high school and go directly to college. Since
Barnard College in New York City did not specify a high
school degree as an admissions requirement, Anastasi
decided she need only submit the results of her College
Entrance Examination Board tests. After taking two
years to prepare at the Rhodes Preparatory School in
Manhattan, she took the tests and was admitted to
Barnard College in 1924 at the age of 15.
Mathematics had been her first love since elementary
school, and at Barnard she was placed in all the advanced
math classes. During her sophomore year, however, she
took a course in developmental psychology with the department chairman, Harry L. Hollingworth, whose stimulating lectures made her intellectually curious about the
discipline. In that course, she encountered a psychology
article by Charles Spearman, whose intriguing work on
correlation coefficients showed her that it was possible to
combine mathematics and psychology. Convinced she
had found the best of both worlds, she enrolled in the
Barnard’s Honors Program in psychology for her last two
years, and received her B.A. in 1928 at the age of 19,
having been elected to Phi Beta Kappa and having won
the Caroline Duror Graduate Fellowship, “awarded to the
member of the graduating class showing the greatest
promise of distinction in her chosen line of work.”

Receives Ph.D., teaches at 21, and writes
classic text at 29
Having taken graduate courses at Columbia University while still at Barnard, she applied there after graduation
and was allowed to skip the master’s degree and to go directly for her Ph.D. in general experimental psychology.
At this time, Columbia’s psychology department provided
a stimulating and lively environment, made more enlightening by its summer sessions that were visited by eminent
psychologists. During her second year at Columbia, Anastasi began to specialize, and it was then that she decided
on the complex field of differential psychology. As the
branch of psychology that deals with individual and group
differences in behavior, it is a highly quantitative field of
study, and therefore much to her liking.
As she had planned, Anastasi received her Ph.D. from
Columbia in only two years, and in 1930 returned to
Barnard to begin teaching. Three years later, she married
psychologist John Porter Foley Jr., a fellow Columbia
Ph.D. student. In 1939 she left Barnard to become assistant
34

professor and sole member of the newly created Psychology Department at Queens College of the City of New York.
After the war, she left Queens College in 1947 to become
associate professor of psychology in the Graduate School
of Arts and Sciences at Fordham University, and full professor in 1951. She remained there until her retirement in
1979, when she became a professor emeritus.
The focus of her research, writing, and teaching has
been on the nature and measurement of psychological
traits. In her landmark work, Psychological Testing,
Anastasi emphasizes the ways education and heredity
influence trait development, and then goes on to demonstrate how the measurement of those traits is affected by
such variables as training, culture, and language differences. Throughout her work, the “nature-nurture” controversy is dominant, and typically, she argues that psychologists have been incorrect seeking to explain behavior by using one or the other. She states, rather, that neither exists apart from the other, and that psychologists
should be questioning how the two interact.
At least two of Anastasi’s other books are considered classics in the field and are found in many translations around the world. The recipient of several honorary
degrees, she became in 1972 the first woman to be elected president of the American Psychological Association
in 50 years. In 1987 her career achievements were recognized when she was presented the National Medal of
Science by President Ronald Reagan.
Anastasi’s life has not been entirely trouble-free, as
she had to survive a diagnosis of cervical cancer in 1934.
When the successful radiation therapy left her unable to
have children, she looked only at the positive aspects of
her condition and stated that she was able to focus solely
on her career without guilt. A well-rounded individual
with an avocational interest in art, she continued her professional writing, speaking, and organizational activities
long past the time when most people have fully retired.
See also Nature-nuture controversy
Leonard C. Bruno
Further Reading
“American Psychological Foundation Awards for 1984.” American Psychologist (March 1985): 340-341.
“Distinguished Scientific Award for the Applications of Psychology: 1981.” American Psychologist (January 1982):
52-59.
Metzger, Linda and Deborah A. Straub, editors. Contemporary
Authors. New Revision Series, Volume 17. Detroit, MI:
Gale Research Co., p 21.
O’Connell, Agnes N. and Nancy Felipe Russo, editors. Women
in Psychology. New York: Greenwood Press, 1990, pp.
13-22.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Anger
One of the primordial emotions, along with fear,
grief, pain, and joy.

Anger is usually caused by the frustration of attempts to attain a goal, or by hostile or disturbing actions
such as insults, injuries, or threats that do not come from
a feared source. The sources of anger are different for
people at different periods in their lives. The most common cause of anger in infants, for example, is restraint of
activity. Children commonly become angry due to restrictive rules or demands, lack of attention, or failure to
accomplish a task. As children reach adolescence and
adulthood, the primary sources of anger shift from physical constraints and frustrations to social ones. In adults,
the basis of anger include disapproval, deprivation, exploitation, manipulation, betrayal, and humiliation, and
the responses to it become less physical and more social
with age. The tantrums, fighting, and screaming typical
of childhood give way to more verbal and indirect expressions such as swearing and sarcasm. Physical violence does occur in adults, but in most situations it is
avoided in deference to social pressures.
Like fear, anger is a basic emotion that provides a
primitive mechanism for physical survival. The physiological changes that accompany anger and fear are very
similar and include increased heart rate and blood pressure, rapid breathing, and muscle tension. However,
anger produces more muscle tension, higher blood pressure, and a lower heart rate, while fear induces rapid
breathing. Unlike the adrenalin-produced “fight or
flight” response that characterizes fear, anger is attributed to the secretion of both adrenalin and another hormone, noradrenalin. Other physical signs of anger include scowling, teeth grinding, glaring, clenched fists,
chills and shuddering, twitching, choking, flushing or
paling, and numbness.
People use a number of defense mechanisms to
deal with anger. They may practice denial, refusing to
recognize that they are angry. Such repressed anger often
finds another outlet, such as a physical symptom. Another way of circumventing anger is through passive aggression, in which anger is expressed covertly in a way
that prevents retaliation. Both sarcasm and chronic lateness are forms of passive aggression. In the classroom, a
passive aggressive student will display behavior that is

subtly uncooperative or disrespectful but which provides
no concrete basis for disciplinary action. Passive aggressive acts may even appear in the guise of a service or
favor, when in fact the sentiments expressed are those of
hostility rather than altruism. Some of the more extreme
defenses against anger are paranoia, in which anger is
essentially projected onto others, and bigotry, in which
such a projection is targeted at members of a specific
racial, religious, or ethnic group.
See also Aggression
Further Reading
Carter, William Lee. The Angry Teenager. Nashville: Thomas
Nelson, 1995.
Dentemaro, Christine. Straight Talk About Anger. New York:
Facts on File, 1995.
Ellis, Albert. Anger: How to Live With and Without It. New
York: Citadel Press, 1977.
Letting Go of Anger: The 10 Most Common Anger Styles and
What To Do About Them. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger
Publications, 1995.
Licata, Renora. Everything You Need to Know About Anger.
New York: Rosen Publishing Group, 1994.
Luhn, Rebecca R. Managing Anger: Methods for a Happier and
Healthier Life. Los Altos, CA: Crisp Publications, 1992.

Animal experimentation
The use of destructive and nondestructive testing
upon various animal species in order to better understand the mechanisms of human and animal behaviors, emotions, and thought processes.

Biologists believe that chimpanzees share at least
98.4 percent of the same DNA as humans. Gorillas have
a genetic composition which is at least 97 percent consistent with that of humans. Because the advancement of
scientific technology has increasingly demonstrated similarities between animals and people, popular attitudes
toward the use of animals in research and scientific experimentation have changed considerably. Ironically, this
knowledge of the close genetic bond between species
has enhanced the interest in animal experimentation.
Nevertheless, evidence of animals as “sentient” beings,
capable of a wide range of emotions and thought
processes, has led scientists and animal activists to
search for alternative ways to study behavior without
victimizing animals. Although most psychology research
does not involve deadly disease or experimental pathology, it often involves unrelenting or quantitative mental,
physical, and psychological stress—all of which animals
are capable of experiencing.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

35

Animal experimentation

Sheehy, Noel, Antony J. Chapman, and Wendy A. Conroy, editors. Biographical Dictionary of Psychology. New York:
Routledge Reference, 1997, pp. 13-14.

Animal experimentation
Animal rights activists, protesting the use of animals in laboratory experiments by dressing in monkey suits, block the
entrance to the Department of Health and Human Services in Washington, D.C. (Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with permission.)

History
Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution in 1859 became the scientific rationale for using animal experiments to learn more about humans. In the late nineteenth
century, Ivan Pavlov’s experiments in the development
of “conditioned” responses in dogs (salivation) helped to
foster an increasingly authoritative school of psychology
known as behaviorism. The contemporary human treatment regimen known as behavior modification is fashioned from parallels drawn on these early experiments in
operant conditioning.
In 1876, England passed the British Cruelty to Animals Act, which regulated animal experimentation. Still,
behaviorist thinking at that time denied animals any psyche or emotion. Academic journals described animal behavior only in terms of physiologic response to stimuli,
with no mention of any psychological consequence.
In later years, the behaviorist theories were overshadowed by the development and spread (from Europe
to the United States) of ethology which concerns itself
with genetic predisposition, or innate/instinctive behavior and knowledge. This theory continues to prevail in
36

the United States, but in terms of relevance, it is tempered by the reality that between 85 and 90 percent of all
animal experimentation is conducted on species not sufficiently similar to humans to draw dispositive parallels.
The majority of all animal research in the field of psychology is conducted on various rodent species (rats,
mice, hamsters, etc.) or birds as laboratory subjects.
Australian philosopher Peter Singer made the case
for an end to animal experimentation with his 1975
book, Animal Liberation. Coinciding with his book was
the comprehensive and sensitive research of such ethologists as Jane Goodall and Dian Fossey, who suggested
that primates were capable of a full spectrum of emotions, including love, sorrow, jealousy, humor, and deceit. These animals also learned to communicate with
humans by using over 300 learned signs in American
Sign Language. Studies with other species produced
similar results. During the late 1990s, an African gray
parrot named Alex, who was being studied at the Arizona
State University, fell ill and was required to spend the
night alone at a veterinary clinic. When his keeper attempted to leave the room at the clinic, Alex cried out,
“Come here, I love you, I’m sorry. Wanna go back.”

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Information
Humane Society of the United States, Animal Research Issues
Section. Washington, DC.

Current trends
Animal experimentation is still widely used in psychological research. Animals are used in projects of
many types from alcohol-induced aggression to pain
medication. A 1999 medical study questioned whether
animal experimentation on the neuroendocrine mechanisms in laboratory rats might provide a better understanding of human bisexuality. However, the trend in
academia seems to be following the popular distaste for
animal experimentation. A British study of undergraduate students enrolled in psychology classes during the
1990s showed that students in psychology were less in
favor of animal testing than students in medicine, and
second-year students were less in favor of such research
than first-year students. Several articles have been published which address the general lack of acknowledgment, in leading introductory psychology textbooks, of
contributions made by animal subjects.
According to the American Psychological Association (APA), less than 10 percent of pure psychological
research uses animals as subjects. This estimate does not
include animal subjects used for cross-over medical experimentation, such as in the related field of neuropsychology. Best estimates for the total number of animal
subjects in all medical/psychological research is about
20 million per year. Of the animals used in psychological
research, 90 percent are rodents and birds.
Concerns about animal cruelty have led to the search
for alternative methodologies. Of great promise in this regard is computer simulation technology. As early as
1996, psychology students were able to study “shaping”
and partial reinforcement in operant conditioning, by
using a computer-created “virtual rat” named Sniffy.
Commensurate with such technological developments
and their refinements, statistics have shown a slow but
consistent yearly decline in animal experimentation
through 1999.
Lauri R. Harding
Further Reading
Baluch, Bahman; and Baljit Kaur. “Attitude Change Toward
Animal Experimentation in an Academic Setting.” Journal of Psychology (July 1995): 477.
McElroy, Susan Chernak. Animals as Teachers and Healers.
New York: Ballantine, 1997.
Mukerjee, Madhusree. “Trends in Animal Research,” Scientific
American (February 1997): 86.

Anorexia
An eating disorder where preoccupation with dieting and thinness leads to excessive weight loss
while the individual continues to feel fat and fails
to acknowledge that the weight loss or thinness is a
problem.

Symptoms of anorexia, or anorexia nervosa, include
significant weight loss, continuation of weight loss despite thinness, persistent feeling of being fat even after
weight loss, exaggerated fear of gaining weight, loss of
menstrual periods, preoccupation with food, calories, nutrition and/or cooking, dieting in secret, compulsive exercising, sleep disorders, and a pattern of binging and
purging. The condition also has psychosexual effects.
The sexual development of anorexic adolescents is arrested, while adults who have the disease generally lose
interest in sex. While the term anorexia literally means
“loss of appetite,” anorexics generally do feel hunger but
still refuse to eat.
The great majority of anorexics (about 95 percent)
are women. Risk factors for the disorder may include a
history of alcoholism and/or depression, early onset of
puberty, tallness, perfectionism, low self-esteem, and
certain illnesses such as juvenile diabetes. Psychosocial
factors associated with the disease are over-controlling
parents, an upwardly mobile family, and a culture that
places excessive value on female thinness. Emotionally,
anorexia often involves issues of control; the typical
anorexic is often a strong-willed adolescent whose aversion to food is a misdirected way of exercising autonomy
to compensate for a lack of control in other areas of his
or her life.
Medical consequences of anorexia may include infertility, osteoporosis, lower body temperatures, lower
blood pressure, slower pulse, a weakened heart, lanugo
(growth of fine body hair), bluish hands and feet, constipation, slowed metabolism and reflexes, loss of muscle
mass, and kidney and heart failure. Anorexics also have
been found to have abnormal levels of several neurotransmitters, which can, in turn, contribute further to depression. People suffering from anorexia often must be hospitalized for secondary medical effects of the condition.
Sometimes the victim must be force-fed in order to be
kept alive. Due to medical complications as well as emotional distress caused by the disorder, anorexia nervosa is
one of the few mental disorders that can be fatal. The

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

37

Anorexia

Such examples of the yet-unknown extent of emotional,
psychological, and behavioral capacity in other species
have cast new doubts on the scientific rationale for the
continuation of captive animal experimentation.

Antidepressants

ance. Treatment and cure for anorexia are possible
through skilled psychiatric intervention that includes
medical evaluation, psychotherapy for the individual
and family group, nutritional counseling, and possibly
medication and/or hospitalization. With treatment and
the passage of time, about 70 percent of anorexics
eventually recover and are able to maintain a normal
body weight.
The American Anorexia and Bulimia Association is
the principal and oldest national non-profit organization
working for the prevention, treatment, and cure of eating
disorders. Its mission is inclusive of sufferers, their families, and friends. The AABA publishes a quarterly
newsletter reviewing developments in research and programming. It also organizes a referral network which includes educational programs and public information materials, professional services and outpatient programs,
patient and parent support groups, and training of recovered patients as support group facilitators.
See also Body image; Bulimia
Further Reading
Epling, W. Rank. Solving the Anorexia Puzzle. Toronto:
Hogrefe and Hubers, 1991.
Maloney, Michael. Straight Talk About Eating Disorders. New
York : Facts on File, 1991.

Further Information

The body of a woman with anorexia. (Biophoto Associates/
Science Source. Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with
permission.)

American Psychiatric Association estimates that mortality rates for anorexia may be as high as 5 to 18 percent.
According to the National Association of Anorexia Nervosa and Associated Disorders (ANAD),
anorexia nervosa and its related disorders, bulimia
and binge eating disorder, afflict an estimated seven
million women and one million men in the United
States. The peak times of onset are ages 12 to 13 and
age 17. The American Anorexia and Bulimia Association (AABA) calculates that as many as 1 percent of
teenage girls become anorexic and 10 percent of those
may die as a result.
In order to reduce the risks of eating disorders,
cultural ideals connecting thinness and beauty to selfworth and happiness must change so that children establish healthier attitudes and eating behaviors, and
learn to value themselves and others for intrinsic qualities, rather than extrinsic ones focusing on appear38

American Anorexia and Bulimia Association (AABA). 418 E.
78th Street, New York, New York 10021, (212) 734–1114.
American Dietetic Association (ADA) NCDC-Eating Disorders. 216 W. Jackson Blvd., Chicago, Illinois 60606,
(800) 366–1655.
National Anoretic Aid Society. 445 E. Dublin-Granville Road,
Worthington, Ohio 43229, (614) 436–1112.
National Association of Anorexia Nervosa and Associated Disorders (ANAD). Box 7, Highland Park, Illinois 60035,
(708) 831–3438.

Antidepressants
Medications used to treat depression.

The two most common types of antidepressants are
tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and selective serotonin
re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs). Examples of TCAs include nortriptyline (also known by the brand name
Pamelor), imipramine (Tofranil), and desipramine
(Norpramin). Examples of SSRIs include fluoxetine
(Prozac), sertraline (Zoloft), and paroxetine (Paxil).
Clinical studies have shown that some people benefit
from these medications.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Before using TCAs, it is necessary to have a medical
history and examination of the patient, including an electrocardiogram (EKG). Not everyone develops side effects when taking TCAs, but the most common side effects include: dry mouth, impaired ability to focus vision at close range, constipation, urinary hesitation,
dizziness, weight gain, and sedation. TCAs may produce
minor cardiovascular changes such as orthostatic hypotension (low blood pressure when the person stands
up, often causing light-headedness), hypertension, rapid
heart beat, and minor changes in the electrical activity of
the heart, which may show in the electrocardiogram
(EKG). Most of these side effects can be minimized by
slowly adjusting the dose of the drug.
During treatment with TCAs, patients should be
monitored by a physician trained in the management of
these medications. It is recommended that he or she perform regular blood pressure, heart rate, and EKG monitoring. TCAs may interact with other medications the patient is taking, so it is important to consult a doctor before doing so. Finally, the TCAs should not be stopped
abruptly, as this may induce mild withdrawal side effects
(malaise, chills, stomachache, flu-like symptoms).
Though they are safe if carefully monitored and taken as
prescribed, TCAs can be lethal if taken in overdose.

Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors
(SSRIs)
The reports that SSRIs are effective in treating
adults with major depressive disorder (MDD), together
with the findings that SSRIs have a relatively benign side
effect profile, low lethality after an overdose, and oncea-day administration, have encouraged the use of SSRIs.
Several studies have reported 70-90% response rate to
fluoxetine or sertraline for the treatment of adolescents
with major depressive disorder, but the results of these
studies are not conclusive because they have methodological limitations. A recent, large, well-performed investigation showed that fluoxetine was more effective for the
treatment of depressed children and adolescents than a
placebo. Despite the significant response to fluoxetine,
many patients had only partial improvement.
Overall, the SSRIs have similar effectiveness and
side effects as TCAs. The most common side effects include nausea, stomachache, diarrhea, headaches, mild
tremors, sweating, sleep disturbance, sedation, restlessness, lack of appetite, decreased weight, vivid dreams,
and sexual dysfunction (inability to have an orgasm or
delayed ejaculation). Most of these side effects are temporary and may be diminished by reducing the dose or

discontinuing the medication. There are no specific laboratory tests required before administering SSRIs. These
drugs do have potentially harmful interactions with several commonly prescribed drugs; therefore, all physicians should be informed if someone is taking an SSRI.

Patients who do not respond to treatment
The most common reasons for failure of treatment
are inadequate medication dosage or length of medication trial, lack of compliance with treatment, exposure to
chronic or severe life events that require different modalities of therapy, existence of other psychiatric disorders
(e.g., substance abuse, anxiety disorder), and misdiagnosis. In adults with resistant depression, several types of
combinations of medications and ECT (electroconvulsive therapy) have been found to be useful.

Antisocial behavior
A pattern of behavior that is verbally or physically
harmful to other people, animals, or property, including behavior that severely violates social expectations for a particular environment.

Antisocial behavior can be broken down into two
components: the presence of antisocial (i.e., angry, aggressive, or disobedient) behavior and the absence of
prosocial (i.e., communicative, affirming, or cooperative) behavior. Most children exhibit some antisocial behavior during their development, and different children
demonstrate varying levels of prosocial and antisocial
behavior. Some children may exhibit high levels of both
antisocial and prosocial behaviors; for example, the popular but rebellious child. Some, however, may exhibit
low levels of both types of behaviors; for example, the
withdrawn, thoughtful child. High levels of antisocial
behavior are considered a clinical disorder. Young children may exhibit hostility towards authority, and be diagnosed with oppositional-defiant disorder. Older children may lie, steal, or engage in violent behaviors, and
be diagnosed with conduct disorder. Mental health
professionals agree, and rising rates of serious school
disciplinary problems, delinquency, and violent crime indicate, that antisocial behavior in general is increasing.
Thirty to 70% of childhood psychiatric admissons are
for disruptive behavior disorders, and diagnoses of behavior disorders are increasing overall. A small percentage of antisocial children grow up to become adults with
antisocial personality disorder, and a greater proportion suffer from the social, academic, and occupational
failures resulting from their antisocial behavior.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

39

Antisocial behavior

Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)

Antisocial behavior

Causes and characteristics
Factors that contribute to a particular child’s antisocial behavior vary, but usually they include some form of
family problems (e.g., marital discord, harsh or inconsistent disciplinary practices or actual child abuse, frequent
changes in primary caregiver or in housing, learning or
cognitive disabilities, or health problems). Attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder is highly correlated with
antisocial behavior. A child may exhibit antisocial behavior in response to a specific stressor (such as the
death of a parent or a divorce) for a limited period of
time, but this is not considered a psychiatric condition.
Children and adolescents with antisocial behavior disorders have an increased risk of accidents, school failure,
early alcohol and substance use, suicide, and criminal
behavior. The elements of a moderate to severely antisocial personality are established as early as kindergarten.
Antisocial children score high on traits of impulsiveness, but low on anxiety and reward-dependence—that
is, the degree to which they value, and are motivated by,
approval from others. Yet underneath their tough exterior
antisocial children have low self-esteem.
A salient characteristic of antisocial children and
adolescents is that they appear to have no feelings. Besides showing no care for others’ feelings or remorse for
hurting others, they tend to demonstrate none of their
own feelings except anger and hostility, and even these
are communicated by their aggressive acts and not necessarily expressed through affect. One analysis of antisocial behavior is that it is a defense mechanism that helps
the child to avoid painful feelings, or else to avoid the
anxiety caused by lack of control over the environment.
Antisocial behavior may also be a direct attempt to
alter the environment. Social learning theory suggests
that negative behaviors are reinforced during childhood
by parents, caregivers, or peers. In one formulation, a
child’s negative behavior (e.g., whining, hitting) initially
serves to stop the parent from behaving in ways that are
aversive to the child (the parent may be fighting with a
partner, yelling at a sibling, or even crying). The child
will apply the learned behavior at school, and a vicious
cycle sets in: he or she is rejected, becomes angry and attempts to force his will or assert his pride, and is then
further rejected by the very peers from whom he might
learn more positive behaviors. As the child matures,
“mutual avoidance” sets in with the parent(s), as each
party avoids the negative behaviors of the other. Consequently, the child receives little care or supervision and,
especially during adolescence, is free to join peers who
have similarly learned antisocial means of expression.
Different forms of antisocial behavior will appear in
different settings. Antisocial children tend to minimize
40

the frequency of their negative behaviors, and any reliable assessment must involve observation by mental
health professionals, parents, teachers, or peers.

Treatment
The most important goals of treating antisocial behavior are to measure and describe the individual child’s
or adolescent’s actual problem behaviors and to effectively teach him or her the positive behaviors that should be
adopted instead. In severe cases, medication will be administered to control behavior, but it should not be used
as substitute for therapy. Children who experience explosive rage respond well to medication. Ideally, an interdisciplinary team of teachers, social workers, and guidance
counselors will work with parents or caregivers to provide universal or “wrap-around” services to help the child
in all aspects of his or her life: home, school, work, and
social contexts. In many cases, parents themselves need
intensive training on modeling and reinforcing appropriate behaviors in their child, as well as in providing appropriate discipline to prevent inappropriate behavior.
A variety of methods may be employed to deliver
social skills training, but especially with diagnosed antisocial disorders, the most effective methods are systemic
therapies which address communication skills among the
whole family or within a peer group of other antisocial
children or adolescents. These probably work best because they entail actually developing (or redeveloping)
positive relationships between the child or adolescent
and other people. Methods used in social skills training
include modeling, role playing, corrective feedback, and
token reinforcement systems. Regardless of the method
used, the child’s level of cognitive and emotional development often determines the success of treatment. Adolescents capable of learning communication and problem-solving skills are more likely to improve their relations with others.
Unfortunately, conduct disorders, which are the primary form of diagnosed antisocial behavior, are highly
resistant to treatment. Few institutions can afford the
comprehensiveness and intensity of services required to
support and change a child’s whole system of behavior;
in most cases, for various reasons, treatment is terminated
(usually by the client) long before it is completed. Often,
the child may be fortunate to be diagnosed at all. Schools
are frequently the first to address behavior problems, and
regular classroom teachers only spend a limited amount
of time with individual students. Special education
teachers and counselors have a better chance at instituting
long-term treatment programs—that is, if the student
stays in the same school for a period of years. One study
showed teenage boys with conduct disorder had had an

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Studies show that children who are given social
skills instruction decrease their antisocial behavior, especially when the instruction is combined with some form
of supportive peer group or family therapy. But the
long-term effectiveness of any form of therapy for antisocial behavior has not been demonstrated. The fact that
peer groups have such a strong influence on behavior
suggests that schools that employ collaborative learning
and the mainstreaming of antisocial students with regular students may prove most beneficial to the antisocial
child. Because the classroom is a natural environment,
learned skills do not need to be transferred. By judiciously dividing the classroom into groups and explicitly
stating procedures for group interactions, teachers can
create opportunities for positive interaction between antisocial and other students.
See also Antisocial personality disorder; Conduct disorder; Oppositional-defiant disorder; Peer acceptance
Further Reading
Evans, W. H., et al. Behavior and Instructional Management:
An Ecological Approach. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1989.
Landau, Elaine. Teenage Violence. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Julian Messner, 1990.
McIntyre, T. The Behavior Management Handbook: Setting
Up Effective Behavior Management Systems. Boston:
Allyn and Bacon, 1989.
Merrell, K. W. School Social Behavior Scales. Bradon, VT:
Clinical Psychology Pub. Co., 1993.
Redl, Fritz. Children Who Hate: The Disorganization and
Breakdown of Behavior Controls. New York: Free Press,
1965.
Shoemaker, Donald J. Theories of Delinquency: An Examination of Explanations of Delinquent Behavior, 2nd ed. New
York: Oxford UP, 1990.
Whitehead, John T. and Steven P. Lab. Juvenile Justice: An Introduction. Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Pub. Co., 1990.
Wilson, Amos N. Understanding Black Adolescent Male Violence: Its Prevention and Remediation. Afrikan World Infosystems, 1992.

version of childhood conduct disorder. Antisocial personality disorder is only diagnosed in people over age 18,
the symptoms are similar to those of conduct disorder,
and the criteria for diagnosis include the onset of conduct
disorder before the age of 15. According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSMIV), people with antisocial personality disorder demonstrate a pattern of antisocial behavior since age 15.
The adult with antisocial personality disorder displays at least three of the following behaviors:
• Fails to conform to social norms, as indicated by frequently performing illegal acts, and pursuing illegal occupations.
• Is deceitful and manipulative of others, often in order
to obtain money, sex, or drugs.
• Is impulsive, holding a succession of jobs or residences.
• Is irritable or aggressive, engaging in physical fights.
• Exhibits reckless disregard for safety of self or others,
misusing motor vehicles or playing with fire.
• Is consistently irresponsible, failing to find or sustain
work or to pay bills and debts.
• Demonstrates lack of remorse for the harm his or her
behavior causes others.
An individual diagnosed with antisocial personality
disorder will demonstrate few of his or her own feelings
beyond contempt for others. This lack of affect is
strangely combined with an inflated sense of self-worth
and often a superficial charm, which tends to mask their
inner apathy. Authorities have linked antisocial personality disorder with abuse, either physical or sexual, during
childhood, neurological disorders (which are often undiagnosed), and low IQ. Those with a parent with an antisocial personality disorder or substance abuse problem
are more likely to develop the disorder. The antisocially
disordered person may be poverty-stricken, homeless, a
substance abuser, or have an extensive criminal record.
Antisocial personality disorder is associated with low socioeconomic status and urban settings.

Treatment

Antisocial personality
disorder
A behavior disorder developed by a small percentage of children with conduct disorder whose behavior does not improve as they mature. Also
known as sociopathy or psychopathy.

About 3% of males and 1% of females develop antisocial personality disorder, which is essentially the adult

Antisocial personality disorder is highly unresponsive to any form of treatment. Although there are medications available that could quell some of the symptoms
of the disorder, noncompliance or abuse of the drugs prevents their widespread use. The most successful treatment programs are long-term, structured residential settings in which the patient systematically earns privileges
as he or she modifies behavior. Some form of dynamic
psychotherapy is usually given along with the behavior
modification. The therapist’s primary task is to establish

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

41

Antisocial personality disorder

average of nine years of treatment by 15 different institutions. Treatments averaged seven months each.

Anxiety/Anxiety disorders

a relationship with the patient, who has usually had very
few relationships in his or her life and is unable to trust,
fantasize, feel, or learn. The patient should be given the
opportunity to establish positive relationships with as
many people as possible and be encouraged to join selfhelp groups or prosocial reform organizations.
See also Antisocial behavior; Conduct disorder; Oppositional-defiant disorder; Peer acceptance
Further Reading
Cleckley, Hervey M. The Mask of Sanity. Rev. ed. New York:
New American Library; St. Louis: Mosby, 1982.
Magid, Ken, and Carole A. McKelvey. High Risk. New York:
Bantam Books, 1988.
Winnicott, D. W. Deprivation and Delinquency. New York:
Tavistock Publications, 1984.

Further Information
Antisocial and Violent Behavior Branch. Division of Biometry
and Applied Sciences. National Institute of Mental
Health. 18-105 Parklawn Bldg., 5600 Fishers Lane,
Rockville, MD 20857, (301) 443–3728.

Anxiety/Anxiety disorders
An unpleasant emotion triggered by anticipation of
future events, memories of past events, or ruminations about the self.

Stimulated by real or imagined dangers, anxiety afflicts people of all ages and social backgrounds. When
the anxiety results from irrational fears, it can disrupt or
disable normal life. Some researchers believe anxiety is
synonymous with fear, occurring in varying degrees and
in situations where people feel threatened by some danger. Others describe anxiety as an unpleasant emotion
caused by unidentifiable dangers or dangers that, in reality, pose no threat. Unlike fear, which is caused by realistic, known dangers, anxiety can be more difficult to identify and to alleviate.
Rather than attempting to formulate a strict definition of anxiety, most psychologists simply make the distinction between normal anxiety and neurotic anxiety, or
anxiety disorders. Normal (sometimes called objective)
anxiety occurs when people react appropriately to the
situation causing the anxiety. For example, most people
feel anxious on the first day at a new job for any number
of reasons. They are uncertain how they will be received
by co-workers, they may be unfamiliar with their duties,
or they may be unsure they made the correct decision in
taking the job. Despite these feelings and any accompanying physiological responses, they carry on and eventually adapt. In contrast, anxiety that is characteristic of
42

anxiety disorders is disproportionately intense. Anxious
feelings interfere with a person’s ability to carry out normal or desired activities. Many people experience stage
fright—the fear of speaking in public in front of large
groups of people. There is little, if any, real danger posed
by either situation, yet each can stimulate intense feelings of anxiety that can affect or derail a person’s desires
or obligations. Sigmund Freud described neurotic anxiety as a danger signal. In his id-ego-superego scheme of
human behavior, anxiety occurs when unconscious sexual or aggressive tendencies conflict with physical or
moral limitations.
Anxiety disorders afflict millions of people. Symptoms of these disorders include physiological responses:
a change in heart rate, trembling, dizziness, and tension,
which may range widely in severity and origin. People
who experience generalized anxiety disorder and panic
disorders usually do not recognize a specific reason for
their anxiety. Phobias and obsessive-compulsive disorders occur as people react to specific situations or stimuli. Generalized anxiety disorder is characterized by pervasive feelings of worry and tension, often coupled with
fatigue, rapid heart rate, impaired sleep, and other physiological symptoms. Any kind of stress can trigger inappropriate, intense responses, and panic attacks can result.
People suffering from generalized anxiety experience
“free-floating” fears, that is, no specific event or situation triggers the response. People keep themselves on
guard to ward against unknown dangers.
It is believed that generalized anxiety disorder is, at
least to some extent, inherited, or is caused by chemical
imbalances in the body. Depending on the severity of the
symptoms and the responsiveness of the patient, treatment may vary. Often, drugs in the benzodiazepine family (Valium, Librium, and Xanax) are prescribed. These
drugs combat generalized anxiety by relaxing the central nervous system, thus reducing tension and relaxing
muscles. They can cause drowsiness, making them an
appropriate treatment for insomnia. In proper dosages,
they can relieve anxiety without negatively affecting
thought processes or alertness. Medication is most effective when combined with psychological therapies to reduce the risk of recurrence. Behavior therapy is designed to help modify and gain control over unwanted
behaviors by learning to cope with difficult situations,
often through controlled exposures to those situations.
Cognitive therapy is designed to change unproductive
thought patterns by learning to examine feelings and distinguish between rational and irrational thoughts. Relaxation techniques focus on breathing retraining to relax
and resolve the stresses that contribute to anxiety.
Controlling or eliminating the physical symptoms of
anxiety without medication is another method of treatment.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Aphasia

APGAR SCORING SYSTEM
Factor

0 points

1 point

2 points

Heart rate

No heartbeat

Under 100 beats per
minute

Over 100 beats per
minute

Respiration

Not breathing

Irregular, with weak cry

Regular with strong cry

Muscle tone

Limp, no movement

Limited movement of the
limbs

Active movement of the
limbs

Color

Completely blue, pale

Pink body with blue hands
and feet

All pink

Reflexes

No response to being
poked in the nose

Grimace when poked

Cry, cough, or sneeze
when poked

For example, practiced breathing techniques can slow the
heart rate. Access to fresh air can ease sweating. Effective
control of such symptoms can be useful in controlling the
anxiety itself. Psychotherapy is another method of treating generalized anxiety disorder and is used in conjunction
with drug therapy or in cases where medication proves
ineffective. While there is no definitive cause for the disorder, communicating their feelings to a sympathetic therapist helps some people reduce their anxiety.
Further Reading
Amen, Daniel G. Change Your Brain, Change Your Life: The
Breakthrough Program for Conquering Anxiety, Depression, Obsessiveness, Anger, and Impulsiveness. New York:
Crown Publishing Group, 2000.
Goodwin, Donald W. Anxiety. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1986.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. 12th ed. Glenview,
IL: Scott, Foresman, 1988.

breathing, muscle tone, color, and reflexes. Each category is given a score between zero and two, with the highest
possible test score totaling ten (a score of 10 is rare, see
chart). Heart rate is assessed as either under or over 100
beats per minute. Respiration is evaluated according to
regularity and strength of the newborn’s cry. Muscle tone
categories range from limp to active movement. Color—
an indicator of blood supply—is determined by how pink
the infant is (completely blue or pale; pink body with
blue extremities; or completely pink). Reflexes are measured by the baby’s response to being poked and range
from no response to vigorous cry, cough, or sneeze. An
infant with an Apgar score of eight to ten is considered to
be in excellent health. A score of five to seven shows mild
problems, while a total below five indicates that medical
intervention is needed immediately.

Aphasia
A condition, caused by neurological damage or
disease, in which a person’s previous capacity to
understand or express language is impaired. The
ability to speak, listen, read, or write may be affected depending on the type of aphasia involved.

Apgar score
An indication of a newborn infant’s overall medical
condition.

The Apgar Score is the sum of numerical results
from tests performed on newborn infants. The tests were
devised in 1953 by pediatrician Virginia Apgar (19091974). The primary purpose of the Apgar series of tests is
to determine as soon as possible after birth whether an
infant requires any medical attention, and to determine
whether transfer to a neonatal (newborn infant) intensive
care unit is necessary. The test is administered one minute
after birth and again four minutes later. The newborn infant’s condition is evaluated in five categories: heart rate,

In contrast to neurological problems that affect the
physical ability to speak or perform other linguistic
functions, aphasia involves the mental ability to manipulate speech sounds, vocabulary, grammar, and meaning.
There are several different types of aphasia. Each has
different symptoms and is caused by damage to a different part of the brain.
The great majority of aphasias are caused by damage to the left hemisphere of the brain, which is the dom-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

43

Aphasia

aphasia is overly concise, in Wernicke’s aphasia it is
filled with an abundance of words (logorrhea), but they
are words which fail to convey the speaker’s meaning.
Even though their pitch and rhythm sound normal, many
of the words are used incorrectly or are made-up words
with no meaning (aphasic jargon). Besides their speech
difficulties, persons with Wernicke’s aphasia also have
trouble comprehending language, repeating speech,
naming objects, reading, and writing. An interesting exception to their comprehension impairment is their ability to respond readily to direct commands that involve
bodily movement, such as “Close your eyes.”

Wernicke's area
Broca's area

Broca’s aphasia results from damage to the frontal lobe of
the language-dominant area of the brain. Wernicke’s
aphasia is caused by damage to the temporal lobe of the
same language-dominant area. (Electronic Illustrations Group.
Reproduced with permission.)

inant language hemisphere for approximately 95 percent
of right-handed people and 60 to 70 percent of left-handed people. Two areas in the left hemisphere—Broca’s
area and Wernicke’s area—and the pathways connecting
them are especially important to linguistic ability, and
damage to these areas is the most common cause of
aphasia. Broca’s area, located in the frontal lobe of the
left hemisphere, is named for the 19th-century French
physician Paul Broca (1824-1880), an early pioneer in
the study of lateralization (the specialized functioning of
the right and left sides of the brain). Aphasia resulting
from damage to this area, called Broca’s aphasia, is characterized by slow, labored, “telegraphic” speech, from
which common grammatical function words, such as
prepositions and articles, are missing (“I went doctor”).
In general, however, comprehension of spoken and written language is relatively unaffected.
Wernicke’s area, in the upper rear part of the left
temporal lobe, is named for Carl Wernicke (18481905), who first described it in 1874. Aphasia associated
with this area—called Wernicke’s aphasia—differs dramatically from Broca’s aphasia. While speech in Broca’s
44

Certain types of aphasia—called disconnection
aphasias—are caused by damage to the connections of
Broca’s or Wernicke’s areas to each other or to other parts
of the brain. Conduction aphasia results from damage to
the fiber bundles connecting the two language areas and is
characterized by fluent but somewhat meaningless speech
and an inability to repeat phrases correctly. In transcortical
sensory aphasia, the connections between Wernicke’s area
and the rest of the brain are severed, but the area itself is
left intact. Persons with this condition have trouble understanding language and expressing their thoughts but can
repeat speech without any trouble. Another type of aphasia, word deafness, occurs when auditory information is
prevented from reaching Wernicke’s area. Persons affected by word deafness can hear sounds of all kinds and understand written language, but spoken language is incomprehensible to them, since the auditory signals cannot
reach the part of the brain that decodes them.
Most types of aphasia are accompanied by some difficulty in naming objects. However, when this problem is
the only symptom, the condition is called anomic aphasia. Persons with anomic aphasia can comprehend and
repeat the speech of others and express themselves fairly
well, although they are unable to find some of the words
they need. However, they do poorly when asked to name
specific objects. Anomic aphasia is caused by left hemisphere damage that does not affect either Broca’s or
Wernicke’s area. It commonly occurs after a head injury
and also in Alzheimer’s disease. Global aphasia is
caused by widespread damage to the dominant cerebral
hemisphere, either left or right. This condition is characterized by an almost total loss of all types of verbal ability—speech, comprehension, reading, and writing.
It is possible for people suffering from aphasia following a stroke or head injury to recover some of their
language abilities with the aid of a speech therapist.
However, there is little chance of recovery from severe
cases of aphasia.
See also Left-brain hemisphere; Right-brain hemisphere

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Browning, Elizabeth. I Can’t See What You’re Saying. New
York: Coward, McCann & Geoghegan, 1973.
Hughes, Kathy. God Isn’t Finished With Me Yet. Nashville:
Winston-Derek, 1990.
Howard, David. Aphasia Therapy: Historical and Contemporary Issues. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1987.

Applied psychology
The area of psychology in which basic theory and
research are applied to the actual problems faced
by individuals on a daily basis.

Applied psychology can be best understood by comparing it to the area of psychology known as basic psychology, which is concerned with answering questions
about behavior through psychological theory and research. Applied psychology utilizes this knowledge to
actively intervene in the treatment of individuals with
mental or emotional disorders, and is also employed in
business, education, and government.
Approximately two-thirds of American psychologists work in applied fields. Many are involved in clinical
or counseling psychology, diagnosing and treating individuals with various problems of adjustment. Approximately one-third of the psychologists in practice in the
United States today are clinical psychologists, and most
people are referred to them for treatment of a wide range
of problems, including developmental, medical, and rehabilitative as well as psychiatric. These professionals use a
wide range of therapies, ranging from Freudian psychoanalysis to Rogerian client-centered therapy to newer
cognitive approaches. Clinical psychologists may go into
private practice, either alone or in groups, or work in hospitals or clinics. They may also practice in a variety of
other settings, including community mental-health centers, university medical schools, centers for the mentally
and physically handicapped, prisons, state institutions
and hospitals, judicial courts, and probation offices. A
subfield within clinical psychology is community psychology, which investigates environmental factors that
contribute to mental and emotional disorders. Health psychologists deal with the psychological aspects of physical
illness, investigating the connections between the mind
and a person’s physical condition.
Applied psychology also includes the areas of
school and educational psychology. School psychologists are state certified and work in public school settings, often with children who have learning, behavioral,
and emotional problems. They perform individualized
assessments of each child, consult with his or her par-

ents, and advise the school system on methods to best facilitate the child’s education. Educational psychologists,
by comparison, study the process of education itself;
how people learn and which educational methods and
materials are most successful. Applied research in this
field focuses on how to improve teaching, solve learning
problems, and measure learning ability and progress.
Educational psychologists may devise achievement
tests, evaluate teaching methods, develop learning aids
and curricula, and investigate how children of various
ages learn. They often serve as researchers and educators
at teacher training institutions, in university psychology
departments, and on the staffs of educational research organizations. Educational psychologists also work in government agencies, business, and the military.
Applied psychology has many applications in business and industry. Organizational and industrial psychologists are concerned with the relationships between people and their jobs. They study and advise employers in
such areas as employee morale, job-related stress, job enrichment, leadership qualities, and the effects of flex
time in productivity. Personnel psychologists screen job
applicants, assess job performance, and recommend employees for promotion. Consumer psychologists study the
preferences and buying habits of consumers as well as
their responses to advertising, often working together
with advertising copywriters, public relations experts,
and statisticians. They are employed not only by business
but also by government agencies such as the Food and
Drug Administration and the Federal Trade Commission.
Engineering psychology applies information about
human behavior to the design of machines, tools, jobs,
and work environments to provide the best possible
match with the abilities and limitations of the human beings who will use them. It is part of a broader area
known as human-factors engineering (also called ergonomics) that has links to anatomy, anthropometry, environmental medicine, and toxicology. One very specific
work environment that provides the arena for another
specialization is the military. Military psychologists applying psychological research to the operations of the
armed forces are involved in personnel selection, testing,
and training; evaluating morale; analyzing job performance; studying social interaction among troops; and
exploring the dynamics of combat situations. Psychology has also contributed to the exploration of space in
areas including the selection and training of astronauts;
the study of alterations in work-rest cycles; the design of
space vehicles, space suits, and equipment used in space;
and research on the operational problems of space flight.
A relatively new specialty is forensic psychology,
which involves the application of psychology to law enforcement and the judicial system. While some forensic

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

45

Applied psychology

Further Reading

Aptitude tests

psychologists perform research in academic settings,
others work in police departments, participating in officer training and assisting in criminal investigations.
Forensic psychologists may help create personality profiles of criminals; formulate principles for jury selection;
hypnotize victims, eyewitnesses, or defendants to enhance their memories; or study the problems involved in
eyewitness testimony. Yet another emerging area is program evaluation, whose practitioners evaluate the effectiveness and cost efficiency of government programs for
the Congressional Budget Office, the General Accounting Office, and other government offices and agencies.
Like psychologists engaged in research, the majority
of those who practice applied psychology hold Ph.D. degrees in the field. Doctoral programs generally require
completion of a four- to six-year program offered by a
university psychology department. The course of study includes a broad overview (including courses in such areas
as statistics, personality theory, and psychotherapy), as
well as specialization in a particular subfield and completion of a practicum, internship, and dissertation. Some
clinical psychologists hold a Psychology Doctorate
(Psy.D.), a degree that was introduced at the University of
Illinois in 1968 and is geared exclusively toward the training of clinicians rather than researchers. Offered at universities and at independent, “free-standing” professional
schools of psychology, the Psy.D. program stresses course
work in applied methods of assessment and intervention
and eliminates the dissertation requirement.
Further Reading
Beck, Robert C. Applying Psychology: Critical and Creative
Thinking. 3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1992.
Wise, Paula Sachs. The Use of Assessment Techniques by Applied Psychologists. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing
Co., 1989.

Aptitude tests
See Vocational Aptitude Test

Archetype
A central concept in the theory of personality developed by Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung.

Archetypes are primordial images and symbols
found in the collective unconscious, which—in contrast
46

to the personal unconscious—gathers together and passes
on the experiences of previous generations, preserving
traces of humanity’s evolutionary development over time.
Carl Jung began to evolve his theory of archetypes
around 1910 while working with patients at the Burghölzli
Mental Hospital. Noting the presence of universal symbols from religion and mythology in the dreams and fantasies of uneducated patients, who would have had no
conscious way of learning them, he concluded that these
images belonged to a part of the unconscious not derived
from personal experience. Jung proposed that universal
images and ideas can be passed from generation to generation like biological traits, and he formulated the concept
of the collective unconscious, whose contents become
conscious when called forth by appropriate experiences in
one’s life. In formulating his ideas about archetypes, Jung
supplemented his clinical observations with a comprehensive study of myths and symbols that later included investigations into the religions and mythologies of preliterate
peoples in Africa and the southwestern United States.
Jungian archetypes are like prototypes or molds that
each person fills in differently depending on his or her individual experience. For example, although the term
“mother” has certain universal connotations that come to
mind for most people, the details of this archetype will be
different for everyone. For Jung, archetypes were more
than a theoretical construct—his interest in them was primarily therapeutic. He claimed that his patients improved
when they understood the ways in which their difficulties
were related to archetypes. There is no limit to the number of possible archetypes: they are as varied as human
experience itself. Many take the form of persons, such as
the hero, the child, the trickster, the demon, and the earth
mother. Others are expressed as forces of nature (sun,
moon, wind, fire) or animals. They may also occur as situations, events (birth, rebirth, death), or places.
Jung considered four archetypes, in particular, important enough to form separate systems within the personality. These include the persona, the anima and animus, the shadow, and the self. The persona is a person’s
public image, the self he or she shows to others (“persona” is derived from the Latin word for mask). The persona is necessary for survival, as everyone must play certain roles, both socially and professionally, to get along
in society. However, management of the persona can
cause emotional difficulties. A common problem occurs
when a person comes to identify too strongly with the
persona that he or she has created, a condition that Jung
called inflation. Victims of this problem are often highly
successful, accomplished people who have become so
preoccupied with projecting a certain image—often for
professional advancement—that their lives become
empty and alienated.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Hall, Calvin S. and Vernon J. Nordby. A Primer of Jungian
Psychology. New York: Mentor, 1973.
Hopcke, Robert. A Guided Tour of the Collected Works of C.
G. Jung. Shambhala; distributed in the U.S. by Random
House, 1989.

Artificial intelligence
Computer-based technology intended to replicate
the complicated processes of human cognition, including such complex tasks as reasoning, and machine learning, whereby a man-made device actually incorporates its experiences into new endeavors, learning from its mistakes and engaging in creative problem solving.

The study of artificial intelligence, referred to as AI,
has accelerated in recent years as advancements in computer technology have made it possible to create more
and more sophisticated machines and software programs. The field of AI is dominated by computer scientists, but it has important ramifications for psychologists
as well because in creating machines that replicate
human thought, much is learned about the processes the
human brain uses to “think.”
Creating a machine to think highlights the complexities and subtleties of the human mind. For instance, cre-

ating a machine to recognize objects in photographs
would seem, at first thought, rather simple. Yet, when humans look at a photograph, they do so with expectations
about the limitations of the media. We fill in the missing
third dimension and account for other missing or inconsistent images with our sense of what the real world
looks like. To program a computer to make those kinds
of assumptions would be a gargantuan task. Consider,
for instance, all the information such a computer would
need to understand that the array of images all pressed
up against a flat surface actually represent the three-dimensional world. The human mind is capable of decoding such an image almost instantaneously.
This process of simulating human thought has led to
the development of new ideas in information processing.
Among these new concepts are fuzzy logic, whereby a
computer is programmed to think in broader terms than either/or and yes/no; expert systems, a group of programming rules that describe a reasoning process allowing
computers to adapt and learn; data mining, detecting patterns in stimuli and drawing conclusions from them; genetic algorithm, a program that provides for random mutation for the machine to improve itself; and several others.
Recent applications of AI technology include machines that track financial investments, assist doctors in diagnoses and in looking for adverse interactions in patients
on multiple medications, and spotting credit card fraud.
An Australian scientist working in Japan is attempting to
create a silicon brain using newly developed quantum resistors. Reported in a 1995 article in Business Week, Hugo
de Garis is leading a team of scientists to create a computing system capable of reproducing itself. As Business
Week reports, the project will attempt to “not only coax
silicon circuits into giving birth to innate intelligence but
imbue them with the power to design themselves—to control their own destiny by spawning new generations of
ever improving brains at electronic speeds.” This type of
technology is called evolvable hardware.
Other recent advances in AI have been the creation
of artificial neural systems (ANS) which has been described as “an artificial-intelligence tool that attempts to
simulate the physical process upon which intuition is
based—that is, by simulating the process of adaptive biological learning.” ANS, essentially, is a network of
computers that are grouped together in ways similar to
the brain’s configuration of biological processing lobes.
Even considering all of these advancements, many
people are skeptical that a machine will ever replicate
human cognition. Marvin Minsky, a scientist at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, states that the
hardest thing of all in the creation of artificial intelligence is building a machine with common sense.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

47

Artificial intelligence

The anima and animus are the opposite of the persona—they represent a person’s innermost self. They are
also distinguished by gender: the anima is a man’s feminine side, and the animus is a woman’s masculine side.
Jung theorized that in order for persons of both sexes to
understand and respond to each other, each sex had to incorporate and be able to express elements of the other, a
belief that foreshadowed both the feminist and men’s
movements in the United States by over half a century.
The shadow is associated with a person’s animal instincts, the “dark side” that is outside the control of the
conscious personality. However, it is also potentially a
source of spontaneity, creativity, and insight. In contrast
to the anima and animus, the shadow is involved in one’s
relationships to persons of the same sex. Perhaps the
most important archetype is that of the Self, which organizes and unites the entire personality. However, rather
than combining all the other archetypes or aspects of
personality, the Self has a dynamic all its own, which
governs both inner harmony and harmony with the external world. It is closely related to the ability of human beings to reach their highest potential, a process that Jung
called individuation, which he considered every person’s
ultimate goal.

Art therapy

Applications

Further Reading
Anthes, Gary H. “Great Expectations: Award Winning AI Scientist Raj Reddy . . .” Computer World (3 April 1995): 82.
Chartrand, Sabra. “A Split in Thinking among Keepers of Artificial Intelligence.” New York Times (18 July 1993).
Port, Otis. “Computers That Think Are Almost Here.” Business
Week (17 July 1995): 68-73.
Wright, Robert. “Can Machines Think?” Time (25 March
1996): 50-58.

Art therapy
The use of art to express feelings, emotions, and
perceptions through the creation and analysis of visual and other sensory symbols and works.

Art therapy, sometimes called expressive art or art
psychology, encourages self-discovery and emotional
growth. It is a two-part process, involving both the creation of art and the discovery of its meaning. Rooted in
Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung’s theories of the subconscious and unconscious, art therapy is based on the
premise that visual symbols and images are the most accessible and natural form of communication to the
human experience. Patients are encouraged to visualize,
and then create, the thoughts and emotions that they
can’t express verbally. The resulting artwork is then reviewed, and its meaning interpreted by the patient. The
analysis of the artwork typically enables a patient to gain
some level of insight into their feelings and allows them
to work through these issues in a constructive manner.
Art therapy is typically practiced in conjunction with individual, group, or family psychotherapy (or verbal
therapy). While a therapist may provide critical guidance
for these activities, an important feature of effective talk
therapy is that the patient/artist, not the therapist, direct
the interpretation of their artwork.
Some mental health professionals also view art
therapy as an effective diagnostic tool for the identification of specific types of mental illness or traumatic
events. In the late 19th century, French psychiatrists Ambrose Tardieu and Paul-Max Simon both published studies on the visual characteristics of and symbolism in the
artwork of the mentally ill. They found that there were
recurring themes and visual elements in the drawings of
patients with specific types of mental illness. More recently, psychiatric literature has explored common
themes and symbols in the artwork of sexual abuse survivors and victims of trauma.
48

Art therapy can be a particularly useful treatment
tool for children, who often have limited language and
communications skills. By drawing or visually expressing their feelings, even if they can’t identify or label the
emotions, younger patients have a starting point from
which to address these issues. Art therapy is also valuable for adolescents and adults who are unable or unwilling to verbalize thoughts and feelings.
Beyond its use in mental health treatment, art therapy
is also employed as an adjunct (or complementary) therapy to traditional medicine for the treatment of biologically
based diseases and conditions. The correlation between
mental health and physical health is well documented. Art
therapy has been used in the healing process to relieve
stress and develop coping mechanisms, in an effort to
treat both the physical and mental needs of the patient.
Although art therapy has traditionally centered on
visual mediums (paintings, sculptures, drawings, etc.),
some mental healthcare providers have broadened the
definition to include music, film, dance, writing, and
other artistic genres.

Benefits
• Self-discovery. At its most successful, art therapy triggers an emotional catharsis (a sense of relief and wellbeing through the recognition and acknowledgement of
subconscious feelings).
• Personal fulfillment. The creation of a tangible reward
can build confidence and nurture feelings of self-worth.
Personal fulfillment comes from both the creative and
the analytical components of the process.
• Empowerment. Art therapy can help individuals visually express emotions and fears that they were never able
to articulate through conventional means, and give
them some sense of control over these feelings.
• Relaxation and stress relief. Chronic stress can be
harmful to both mind and body. It can weaken and
damage the immune system, cause insomnia and depression, and trigger a host of circulatory problems
(e.g., high blood pressure, atherosclerosis, and cardiac
arrhythmia). When used alone or in combination with
other relaxation techniques such as guided imagery, art
therapy can be a potent stress reliever.
• Symptom relief and physical rehabilitation. Art therapy
can also help individuals cope with pain and promote
physiological healing by identifying and working
through anger and resentment issues and other emotional stresses.
See also Music therapy
Paula Ford-Martin

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Ganim, Barbara. Art and healing: using expressive art to heal
your body, mind, and spirit. New York: Three Rivers
Press, 1999.

Assessment, psychological
The assessment of personality variables.

Psychological assessment is used for a variety of
purposes, ranging from screening job applicants to providing data for research projects. Most assessment methods fall into one of three categories: observational methods, personality inventories, or projective techniques.
Observational assessment is performed by a trained
professional either in the subject’s natural setting (such
as a classroom), an experimental setting, or during an interview. Interviews may be either structured with a standard agenda, or unstructured, allowing the subject to determine much of what is discussed and in what order.
Impressions gained from interviews are often recorded
using rating scales listing different personality traits.
Expectations of the observer, conveyed directly or
through body language and other subtle cues, may influence how the interviewee performs and how the observer
records and interprets his or her observations.
Personality inventories consist of questionnaires on
which people report their feelings or reactions in certain
situations. They may assess a particular trait, such as
anxiety, or a group of traits. One of the oldest and best
known personality inventories is the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI), a series of 550
questions used to assess a number of personality traits
and psychological disturbances for people over age 16.
The MMPI is scored by comparing the subject’s answers
to those of people known to have the traits or disturbances in question. While initially designed to aid in the
diagnosis of serious personality disorders, the MMPI is
now widely used for persons with less severe problems,
as enough data has been collected from this population
to allow for reliable interpretation of test results. One
problem with personality inventories is that people may
try to skew their answers in the direction they think will
help them obtain their objective in taking the test,
whether it is being hired for a job or being admitted to a
therapy program. Validity scales and other methods are
commonly used to help determine whether an individual
has answered the test items carefully and honestly.
A projective test gives the subject a greater opportunity for imaginative freedom of expression than does a personality inventory, where the questions are fixed before-

hand. Projective tests present individuals with ambiguous
situations which they must interpret, thus projecting their
own personalities onto those situations. The best known
projective test is the Rorschach Psychodiagnostic Test, or
inkblot, test first devised by the Swiss psychologist Hermann Rorschach in the 1920s. The test subject describes
his or her reactions to elaborate inkblots presented on a series of ten cards. Responses are interpreted with attention to three factors: what parts or parts of each inkblot the
subject responds to; what aspects of the inkblot are
stressed (color, shape, etc.); and content (what the inkblot
represents to the subject). Another widely used projective
test is the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT), developed
at Harvard University in the 1930s. In this test, the subject
is shown a series of pictures, each of which can be interpreted in a variety of ways, and asked to construct a story
based on each one. Responses tend to reflect a person’s
problems, motives, preoccupations, and interpersonal
skills. Projective tests require skilled, trained examiners,
and the reliability of these tests is difficult to establish due
to their subjective nature. Assessments may vary widely
among different examiners. Scoring systems for particular
traits have been fairly reliable when used with the Thematic Apperception Test.
See also Personality inventory; Rorschach technique
Further Reading
Handbook of Psychological Assessment. New York: Wiley,
1990.
Personality and Ability: The Personality Assessment System.
Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1994.

Assimilation
An aspect of adaptation proposed by French psychologist Jean Piaget.

In the cognitive development theory of Jean Piaget, assimilation is one of two complementary activities
involved in adaptation, the process of learning from and
adjusting to one’s environment. Assimilation consists of
taking in new information and incorporating it into existing ways of thinking about the world. Conversely, accommodation is the process of changing one’s existing
ideas to adapt to new information. When an infant first
learns to drink milk from a cup, for example, she tries to
assimilate the new experience (the cup) into her existing
way of ingesting milk (sucking). When she finds that this
doesn’t work, she then changes her way of drinking milk
by accommodating her actions to the cup. The dual
process of accommodation and assimilation leads to the
formation and alteration of schemas, generalizations

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

49

Assimilation

Further Reading

Associationism

about the world which are formed from past experience
and used to guide a person through new experiences. According to Piaget, cognitive development involves the
constant search for a balance between assimilation and
accommodation, which he referred to as equilibration.
In the context of personality, the term “assimilation” has been used by Gordon Allport (1897-1967) to
describe the tendency to fit information into one’s own
attitudes or expectations. In the study of attitudes and
attitude change, it means adopting the attitudes of people with whom we identify strongly.
Further Reading
Allport, G. Pattern and Growth in Personality. New York: Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston, 1961.
Piaget, Jean, and Bärbel Inhelder. The Psychology of the Child.
New York: Basic Books, 1969.

Associationism
The view that mental processes can be explained
in terms of the association of ideas.

Advanced primarily by a succession of 18th- and
19th-century British philosophers, associationism anticipated developments in the modern field of psychology in
a variety of ways. In its original empiricist context, it
was a reaction against the Platonic philosophy of innate
ideas that determined, rather than derived from, experience. Instead, the associationists proposed that ideas
originated in experience, entering the mind through the
senses and undergoing certain associative operations.
The philosopher John Locke (1632-1704) introduced the term “association of ideas” in the fourth edition of his Essay Concerning Human Understanding
(1700), where he described it as detrimental to rational
thought. George Berkeley (1685-1753), an Irish bishop,
applied associationist principles to visual depth perception, arguing that the capacity to see things in three dimensions is the result of learning, not of innate ability.
The British physician David Hartley (1705-1757) also
dealt with the biological implications of associationism,
formulating a neurophysiological theory about the transmission of ideas and also describing physical activity in
terms of association (a concept that anticipated subsequent principles of conditioning). Hartley also developed a comprehensive theory of associationism that encompassed memory, imagination, dreams, and morality. The Scottish philosopher David Hume (1711-1776)
proposed the principles of similarity and contiguity, asserting that ideas that are similar or experienced simul50

taneously (or in rapid succession) become associated
with each other.
James and John Stuart Mill (father and son philosophers) continued to examine associationism into the
19th century. The elder Mill proposed a mechanistic
theory that linked ideas together in “compounds,” especially through the principle of contiguity. The younger
Mill, whose defining metaphor for the association of
ideas was “mental chemistry,” differed from his father in
claiming that the mind played an active rather than a
passive role in forming associations. He also suggested
that a whole idea may amount to more than the sum of
its parts, a concept similar to that later advocated by
psychologists of the Gestalt school. Other 19th-century
figures known for associationist ideas were Thomas
Browne, who proposed several secondary laws of association, and Alexander Bain (1818-1903), who formulated a comprehensive psychological system based on
association.
Aside from similarity and contiguity, other governing principles have been proposed to explain how
ideas become associated with each other. These include temporal contiguity (ideas or sensations formed
close together in time), repetition (ideas that occur together repeatedly), recency (associations formed recently are the easiest to remember), and vividness (the
most vivid experiences form the strongest associative
bonds). In the 20th century, the clearest heir to associationism is behaviorism, whose principles of conditioning are based on the association of responses to
stimuli (and on one’s association of those stimuli with
positive or negative reinforcement). Also, like associationism, behaviorism emphasizes the effects of environment (nurture) over innate characteristics (nature).
Association appears in other modern contexts as well:
the free association of ideas is a basic technique in the
theory and practice of psychoanalysis, and association
plays a prominent role in more recent cognitive theories of memory and learning.
Further Reading
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding.
Buffalo: Prometheus Books, 1995.
Russell, Bertrand. A History of Western Philosophy. New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1945.
Schultz, D. P. A History of Modern Psychology. 3rd ed. New
York: Academic Press, 1981.

Attachment
An emotional bond between an infant or animal
and its caregiver, contributing to the infant or ani-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Many developmental psychologists view attachment—the special relationship between infant and caregiver—as an important building block for later relationships and adult personality. Since attachment plays a
central role in theories of social and emotional development, the scientific study of attachment has remained in
the forefront of developmental psychology for the past
several decades.
John Bowlby, a psychoanalytically trained clinician, developed modern attachment theory in the 1950s
as a variant of object-relations, which was a variant of
Freud’s theory that the infant’s tie to the mother is the
cornerstone of adult personality.
Bowlby integrated a number of approaches into his
theory, including systems and evolutionary theories to
formulate a modern attachment theory.
Before widespread acceptance of Bowlby’s theory,
psychologists viewed attachment as a secondary drive,
derived from primary drives like hunger. It was thought
that attachment to the mother occurred because she supplied food and became the object of the infant’s attachment through association with feeding and the reduction
of other primary needs. Prior to Bowlby’s theory, behaviorist psychologists theorized that the need for attachment arose from an infant’s physical needs for food and
warmth, both of which were provided by the mother.
They believed that a baby’s preference for the mother
was the result of conditioning. A child was thought to be
overly attached if crying and clingy behavior occurred
frequently.
Research in the 1950s, however, cast these theories
into doubt. One of the most famous research studies in
this area was performed by Harry Harlow. He placed
infant monkeys in a cage with two surrogate mother
dolls: one made of wire holding a bottle of milk and the
other made of soft cloth. According to the behaviorist
view, the monkey should have developed an attachment
to the wire mother because she was the source of food.
But the infant monkeys developed attachments to the
cloth mothers, suggesting that the need for comfort and
warmth are more important, or more psychologically ingrained, than the need for food.
Later experiments with monkeys also revealed the
effects secure attachments had on infants. In one experiment, strange foreign objects were introduced to a cage
with an infant monkey. When alone, the monkey would
react with fear. When the cloth mother was present,
however, the infant would first retreat to the mother in

fear, but then, having been reassured, it would begin to
explore the foreign object. Human infants, too, are much
more likely to react with fear to unknowns if a mother is
not in the vicinity. With a mother present, however, an
infant is much more exploratory—even if the mother is
not within sight but nearby.
Bowlby became one of the first to map out stages of
attachment, addressed in his writings, including his 1980
book, Attachment and Loss. Bowlby suggested that from
birth until about the age of three months, babies are in
the initial pre-attachment phase. Here, infants simply
need to be held and demonstrate no preference for who
does the holding. The next phase, attachment-in-themaking phase, takes place from three to four months and
is marked by an infant’s emerging preference to be held
by familiar figures, although it is important to note that
the figure does not necessarily have to be the mother. According to Bowlby, the final stage of attachment is the
clear-cut attachment phase. Beginning at about six
months, this phase features an infant’s clear insistence on
its mother or its primary caregiver.
Mary Ainsworth, a prominent researcher in attachment and an associate of Bowlby’s, devised a test to measure the type and degree of attachment a child feels for
his mother. The test, called the Ainsworth Strange Situation test, involves a mother leading her child into a
strange room, which the child is free to explore with the
mother present. A stranger then enters the room and the
mother leaves. If the infant becomes distressed, the
stranger will try and console her. The mother then returns
and the stranger leaves. In another scenario, the mother
leaves again after the stranger returns. Finally, the mother
returns for good and the stranger leaves. Based on the infants’ response to their mothers’ return, children are labeled “securely attached,” “avoidant,” or “ambivalent.”
Psychologists believe that attachment serves to help
children begin exploring the world. As the above studies
show, if presented with a strange situation, an infant will
either avoid or engage in exploration, chiefly dependent
upon whether an attachment figure is present. Additionally, it has been shown that lack of attachment in early
life can have a negative impact on exploratory propensity
in later life. In 1971, researchers separated a group of
monkeys from their mothers for six days and then analyzed their behaviors two years later in comparison to a
control group that had not undergone separation. The
group that had been separated was observed to be far
more reticent in exploratory behaviors than the control
group. Still other studies indicate that cognitive functioning in children is enhanced among “securely attached”
(according to the Ainsworth scale) infants.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Behaviorism; Stranger anxiety
51

Attachment

mal’s experience of safety, comfort, and security
while in the caregiver’s presence and distress when
temporarily separated.

Attention

Further Reading
Karen, Robert.Becoming Attached: Unfolding the Mysteries of
the Infant-Mother Bond and Its Impact on Later Life.
New York: Warner Books., 1994.
Thompson, Andrea. “The Affection Factor.” Working Mother
(April 1995): 63.
Wise, Nicole. “What’s in Passion?” Parenting (May 1993): 131.

Attention
Selective concentration or focus on a particular
stimulus.

Attention describes the focusing of perceptive
awareness on a particular stimulus or set of stimuli that
results in the relative exclusion of other stimuli and is
often accompanied by an increase in the readiness to receive and to respond to the stimulus or set of stimuli involved. A state of attention may be produced initially in
many ways, including as a conscious, intentional decision, as a normal function of social interaction, or as a
reaction to an unexpected event. In any case, attention is
a fundamental component of learning. There is evidence
that very young human infants have an innate ability and
inclination to attend to, however briefly, particular instances of auditory or visual stimulation. Children often
demonstrate the effects of their attention in the form of
apparent misperceptions. For example, the relative size
of objects near the center of a child’s visual stimulus
field is regularly overestimated by the child. In human
adults, generally, attention seems to be directly related to
the novelty, incongruity, complexity, or personal significance of the situation. As situations become increasingly
familiar or similar to situations previously experienced
by an individual, the actions of that individual become
increasingly routine, and the individual becomes less attentive. There are distinct and measurable neurological
and physiological, bioelectric and biochemical aspects
and correlates of attention, and the capacity to achieve or
to maintain a state of attention may be limited by a number of mental or physical dysfunctions.
In psychology, the term “attention span” is used
technically and specifically to mean the number of separate stimulus elements, or the amount of stimulus material, that can be perceived and remembered after a brief
presentation. In popular usage, the term attention span is
used to mean the amount of time that can be continuously spent in a state of attention.
Further Reading
Hans, James. The Mysteries of Attention. Albany: SUNY Press,
1993.
52

Attention deficit/
hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD)
Disorder characterized by attentional deficit and/or
hyperactivity—impulsivity more severe than expected for a developmental age.

Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
refers to a combination of excessive motor restlessness,
difficulty in controlling or maintaining attention to relevant events, and impulsive responding that is not adaptive. Children and adults experience the symptoms of
ADHD in most areas of their life. It affects their performance in school or at work, depending on their age, and
it affects them socially. In some cases, however, ADHD
sufferers experience the disorder in only one arena, such
as a child who may be hyperactive only in school, or an
adult who finds it impossible to concentrate during meetings or while socializing with friends after work. Particularly stressful situations, or those requiring the sufferer
to concentrate for prolonged periods of time, often will
exacerbate a symptom or a series of symptoms.
Studies indicate that ADHD affects 3-5% of all children. For some children hyperactivity is the primary feature of their ADHD diagnosis. These children may be
unable to sit quietly in class. They may fidget in their
chairs, sharpen their pencils multiple times, flip the corners of the pages back and forth, or talk to a neighbor.
On the way up to the teacher’s desk they may take several detours.
Most children with ADHD have both attentional and
hyperactivity-impulsivity components, and so they may
experience difficulties regulating both attention and activity. Although many children who do not have ADHD
seem periodically inattentive or highly active, children
with ADHD experience these difficulties more severely
than others at the same developmental level. Moreover,
these difficulties interfere with age-appropriate behavioral expectations across settings such as home, playground, and school.
Psychologists have not always used the label ADHD
to describe this constellation of behaviors. In the 1950s
and 60s, children exhibiting these symptoms were either
diagnosed as minimally brain damaged or labeled as behavior problems. The fourth edition of the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual (DSM-IV), which is used to classify psychiatric disorders, describes ADHD as a pattern
of inattention and/or impulsivity-hyperactivity more severe than expected for the child’s developmental level.
The symptoms must be present before age seven, although diagnosis is frequently made only after the disor-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)
ADHD affects people throughout their lives. This man is performing memory-improving exercises to overcome his attention
deficit difficulties. (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with permission.)

der interferes with school activities. Symptoms must be
present in at least two settings, and there must be clear
evidence of interference with academic, social, or occupational functioning. Finally, the symptoms must not be
due to other neuropsychiatric disorders such as pervasive developmental disorder, schizophrenia or other
psychoses, or anxiety disorder or other neuroses.
Inattention may be evident in (a) failing to attend
closely to tasks or making careless errors, (b) having difficulty in persisting with tasks until they are completed,
(c) appearing not to be listening, (d) frequently shifting
tasks or activities, (e) appearing disorganized, (f) avoiding activities that require close or sustained attention, (g)
losing or damaging items by not handling them with sufficient care, (h) being distracted by background noises or
events, or (i) being forgetful in daily activities. According to the DSM-IV, six or more of these symptoms must
persist for six months or more for a diagnosis of ADHD
with inattention as a major component.
Hyperactivity may be seen as (a) fidgety behavior or
difficulty sitting still, (b) excessive running or climbing
when not appropriate, (c) not remaining seated when
asked to, (d) having difficulty enjoying quiet activities,

(e) appearing to be “constantly on the go,” or (f) excessive talking. Impulsivity may be related to hyperactive
behavior and may be manifest as (a) impatience or blurting out answers before the question has been finished,
(b) difficulty in waiting for one’s turn, and (c) frequent
interruptions or intrusions. Impulsive children frequently
talk out of turn or ask questions seemingly “out of the
blue.” Their impulsivity may also lead to accidents or engaging in high risk behavior without consideration of the
consequences. According to the DSM-IV, six or more of
these symptoms must persist for six months or more for
a diagnosis of ADHD with hyperactivity-impulsivity as a
major component.
The DSM-IV recognizes subtypes of ADHD. The
most prevalent type is the Combined Type, in which individuals show at least six of the symptoms of inattention as well as of hyperactivity or impulsivity. The Predominantly Inattentive Type and the Predominantly Hyperactive-Impulsive type are distinguished by which of
the major pattern of symptoms predominate.
It is important that a careful diagnosis be made before proceeding with treatment, especially with medication. Often symptoms of inattention or hyperactivity may

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

53

Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)

cause parents to seek professional help, but these symptoms may not necessarily indicate the presence of
ADHD. Paul Dworkin, a physician with special interests
in school failure, reports that out of 245 children referred
for evaluation due to parental or school concerns about
inattention, impulsivity, or overactivity, only 38% received a diagnosis of ADHD, although almost all (91%)
were diagnosed with some kind of academic problem.

show some reduced metabolism in certain areas (prefrontal and premotor cortex) in ADHD adults, but findings on younger patients are less clear. One complication in conducting these imagining studies is the necessity for patients to remain still for a period of time,
something that is, of course, difficult for ADHD children to do.

Treatment
Who gets ADHD?
Boys outnumber girls by at least a factor of four;
studies have found prevalence ranging from four to nine
times as many boys with ADHD compared to girls. The
family members (first degree relatives) of children with
ADHD are more likely to have the disorder, as well as a
higher prevalence of mood and anxiety disorders, learning disabilities, and substance abuse problems. Children
who have a history of abuse or neglect, multiple foster
placements, infections, prenatal drug exposure, or low
birth weight are also more likely to have ADHD. Although there is no definitive laboratory test for ADHD
nor a distinctive biological marker, children with ADHD
do have a higher rate of minor physical anomalies than
the general population.
Children may develop problems because of the consequences of ADHD. If the causes of a child’s disruptive
or inattentive behavior are not understood, the child may
be punished, ridiculed, or rejected, leading to potential reactions in the areas of self-esteem, conduct, academic performance, and family and social relations. A child who
feels that he or she is unable to perform to expectations no
matter what type of effort is put forth may begin to feel
helpless or depressed. Often, the reaction can exacerbate
the inattention or hyperactivity or diminish the child’s capacity to compensate, and a vicious cycle can develop.
The course of the disorder may vary. For many
ADHD children, symptoms remain relatively stable into
the early teen years and abate during later adolescence
and adulthood. About 30-40% of cases persist into the late
teens. Some individuals continue to experience all of their
symptoms into adulthood and others retain only some.

What causes ADHD?
The exact cause of ADHD is not known. The increased incidence of the disorder in families suggests a
genetic component in some cases. Brain chemistry is
implicated by the actions of the medications that reduce
ADHD symptoms, suggesting that there may be a dysfunction of the norepinephrine and dopamine systems.
Brain imagining techniques have been used with mixed
success. Positron emission tomography (PET) scans
54

Treatment for ADHD takes two major forms: treating the child and treating the environment. Pharmacological treatment can be effective in many cases. Stimulant medications (Ritalin/methylphenidate, Dexedrine/
dextroamphetimine, and Cylert/magnesium pemoline)
have positive effect in 60-80% of cases and are the most
common type of drugs used for ADHD. The benefits include enhancement of attention span, decrease in impulsivity and irrelevant behavior, and decreased activity.
Vigilance and discrimination increase and handwriting
and math skills frequently improve. These gains are most
striking when pharmacological treatment is combined
with educational and behavioral interventions.
Stimulant medications, however, may have side effects that may make them inappropriate choices. These
side effects include loss of appetite, insomnia, mood disturbance, headache, and gastro-intestinal distress. Tics
may also appear and should be monitored carefully. Psychotic reactions are among the more severe side effects.
There is some evidence that long-term use of stimulant
medication may interfere with physical growth and
weight gain. These effects are thought to be ameliorated
by “medication breaks” over school vacations and weekends, and the like.
When stimulant medications are not an appropriate
choice, non-stimulants or tricyclic antidepressants may
be prescribed. The use of tricyclic antidepressants, especially, has to be monitored carefully due to possible cardiac side effects. Combined pharmacologic treatment is
used for patients who have ADHD in addition to another
psychiatric disorder.
It is important that drug treatment not be used exclusively in the management of ADHD. Each child
should have an individual educational plan that outlines
modifications to the regular mode of instruction that
will facilitate the child’s academic performance. Teachers need to consider the needs of the ADHD child when
giving instructions, making sure that they are well paced
with cues to remind the child of each one. They must
also understand the origins of impulsive behavior—that
the child is not deliberately trying to ruin a lesson or activity by acting unruly. Teachers should be structured,
comfortable with the remedial services the child may

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Special assistance may not be limited to educational
settings. Families frequently need help in coping with
the demands and challenges of the ADHD child. Inattention, shifting activities every five minutes, difficulty
completing homework and household tasks, losing
things, interrupting, not listening, breaking rules, constant talking, boredom, and irritability can take a toll on
any family.
Support groups for families with any ADHD member are increasingly available through school districts
and health care providers. Community colleges frequently offer courses in discipline and behavior management.
Counseling services are available to complement any
type of pharmacological treatment that the family obtains for its member. There are also a number of popular
books that are informative and helpful. Some of these are
listed below.
Doreen Arcus, Ph.D.
Further Reading
Barkley, R.A. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A
Handbook for Diagnosis and Treatment. New York: Guildord Press, 1990.
Hallowell, E.M. and J.J. Ratey. Driven to Distraction: Recognizing and Coping with Attention Deficit Disorder from
Childhood through Adulthood. New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1994.
Manuzza, S., R.G. Klein, A. Bessler, P. Malloy, and M. LaPadula. “Adult Outcome of Hyperactive Boys: Educational Achievement, Occupational Rank, and Psychiatric Status.” Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, (1993): 565-76.
Weiss, G. Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 1992.
Wender, P. The Hyperactive Child, Adolescent, and Adult: Attention Deficit Disorder through the Lifespan. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1987.
Wilens, T.E. and J. Biederman. “The Stimulants.” Psychiatric
Clinics of North America. D. Shafer, ed. Philadelphia:
W.B. Saunders, 1992.
Zametkin, A.J. and J.L. Rappaport. “Neurobiology of Attention
Deficit Disorder with Hyperactivity: Where Have We
Come in 50 Years?” Journal of the American Academy of
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 26, (1987): 676-86.

Further Information
Attention Deficit Disorder Association. P.O. Box 972, Mentor,
OH 44061, (800) 487–2282.
CHADD (Children and Adults with Attention Deficit Disorder). 499 NW 70th Ave., Suite 308, Plantation, FL 33317,
(305) 587–3700 (A national and international non-profit
organization for children and adults with ADHD).

Attitude and behavior
Attitude is a feeling, belief, or opinion of approval
or disapproval towards something. Behavior is an
action or reaction that occurs in response to an
event or internal stimuli (i.e., thought).

People hold complex relationships between attitudes
and behavior that are further complicated by the social
factors influencing both. Behaviors usually, but not always, reflect established beliefs and attitudes. For example, a man who believes strongly in abstinence before
marriage may choose to remain a virgin until his wedding night. Under other circumstances, that same man
may engage in premarital sex despite his convictions
after being influenced by social messages that his masculinity is dependent on sexual activity.
Ideally, positive attitudes manifest well-adjusted behaviors. However, in some cases healthy attitudes may result in harmful behavior. For example, someone may remain in an abusive and potentially deadly domestic situation because they hold negative attitudes towards divorce.
Behavior can be influenced by a number of factors
beyond attitude, including preconceptions about self and
others, monetary factors, social influences (what peers
and community members are saying and doing), and
convenience. Someone may have strong convictions
about improving the public school system in their town,
but if it means a hefty increase to their property taxes,
they may vote against any improvements due to the potential for monetary loss. Or, they may simply not vote at
all because their polling place is too far from their home,
or the weather is bad on election day.
Studies have demonstrated that, in some cases,
pointing out inconsistencies between attitudes and behavior can redirect the behavior. In the case of the school
supporter, showing that their actions (i.e., not voting, not
attending parent-teacher organization meetings) are
harming rather than helping efforts to improve education
in their town may influence them to reevaluate their behavior so that it reflects their attitudes.
For those in need of psychological treatment, there
are several treatment approaches that focus on changing
attitudes in order to change behavior. Cognitive therapy
and cognitive-behavior therapy are two of those techniques. Cognitive therapy attempts to change irrational
ways of thinking. Cognitive-behavioral therapy tries to
correct the resulting inappropriate behavior.

Changing attitudes to change behavior
Attitude and behavior are woven into the fabric of
daily life. Research has shown that individuals register

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

55

Attitude and behavior

need, and able to maintain good lines of communication
with the parent.

Attitudes and attitude change

an immediate and automatic reaction of “good” or “bad”
towards everything they encounter in less than a second,
even before they are aware of having formed an attitude.
Advertising, political campaigns, and other persuasive
media messages are all built on the premise that behavior
follows attitude, and attitude can be influenced with the
right message delivered in the right way.
The fields of social and behavioral psychology have
researched the relationship between attitude and behavior extensively. The more psychologists can understand
the relationship between attitude and behavior and the
factors that influence both, the more effectively they can
treat mental disorders, and contribute to the dialogue on
important social problems such as racism, gender bias,
and age discrimination.
The concept of “social marketing” combines cognitive-behavioral components of psychology with social
science and commercial marketing techniques to encourage or discourage behaviors by changing the attitudes
that cause them. It is also a key part of public health education initiatives, particularly in the case of preventive
medicine. Campaigns promoting positive attitudes towards prenatal care, abstinence from drug use, smoking
cessation, sunscreen use, organ donations, safe sex, cancer screening, and other healthcare initiatives are all examples of social marketing in action. In effect, social
marketing is “selling” attitudes and beliefs and ideally
influencing associated behavior.

Changing behavior to influence attitudes
In 1955, clinical psychologist and educator George
Kelly introduced his psychology of personal constructs.
Kelly’s constructs were based on the idea that each individual looks at the world through his or her own unique
set of preconceived notions about it (i.e., constructs).
These constructs change and adapt as the individual is
exposed to new and different situations. At the heart of
Kelly’s theory is the idea that individuals can seek new
experiences and practice and adapt new behaviors in
order to change their attitudes (or constructs) towards the
world. He recommended that therapists encourage their
patients to try out new behaviors and coping strategies;
he and others that followed frequently found that patients would adapt these useful new behavior patterns
and subsequently change their attitudes.
When behavior is inconsistent with attitude, it is
sometimes a result of social or peer pressure. While
adult behavior generally follows from held attitudes, for
children, attitudes are often shaped by observed behavior.
From a very young age, children copy the actions of others and, to a degree, build their attitudes and beliefs from
this learned behavior. As children grow into adolescence,
56

the behavior of their peers can have a significant impact.
Sometimes this peer pressure factor can be used to an advantage. One research study found that antismoking campaigns targeted at teenagers can have a higher success
rate when adolescent peers are used as instructors.
Paula Ford-Martin

Further Reading
Byrne, Donn and Robert A. Baron. Social psychology. 8th edition. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon, Inc., 1997.
Eagly, Alice and Shelly Chaiken. Dawn Youngblood, ed. The
psychology of attitudes. Forth Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich College Publishers, 1993.
Kelly, George. The psychology of personal constructs. 2 vols.
New York: Norton, 1955.

Attitudes and attitude change
An attitude is a predisposition to respond cognitively, emotionally, or behaviorally to a particular
object, person, or situation in a particular way.

Attitudes have three main components: cognitive, affective, and behavioral. The cognitive component concerns
one’s beliefs; the affective component involves feelings
and evaluations; and the behavioral component consists of
ways of acting toward the attitude object. The cognitive aspects of attitude are generally measured by surveys, interviews, and other reporting methods, while the affective
components are more easily assessed by monitoring physiological signs such as heart rate. Behavior, on the other
hand, may be assessed by direct observation.
Behavior does not always conform to a person’s feelings and beliefs. Behavior which reflects a given attitude
may be suppressed because of a competing attitude, or in
deference to the views of others who disagree with it. A
classic theory that addresses inconsistencies in behavior
and attitudes is Leon Festinger’s theory of cognitive dissonance, which is based on the principle that people prefer their cognitions, or beliefs, to be consistent with each
other and with their own behavior. Inconsistency, or dissonance, among their own ideas makes people uneasy
enough to alter these ideas so that they will agree with
each other. For example, smokers forced to deal with the
opposing thoughts “I smoke” and “smoking is dangerous”
are likely to alter one of them by deciding to quit smoking, discount the evidence of its dangers, or adopt the view
that smoking will not harm them personally. Test subjects
in hundreds of experiments have reduced cognitive dissonance by changing their attitudes. An alternative explana-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Attitudes are formed in different ways. Children acquire many of their attitudes by modeling their parents’
attitudes. Classical conditioning using pleasurable stimuli is another method of attitude formation and one widely
used by advertisers who pair a product with catchy music,
soothing colors, or attractive people. Operant conditioning, which utilizes rewards, is a mode of attitude formation often employed by parents and teachers. Attitudes are
also formed through direct experience. It is known, in fact,
that the more exposure one has toward a given object,
whether it is a song, clothing style, beverage, or politician,
the more positive one’s attitude is likely to be.
One of the most common types of communication,
persuasion, is a discourse aimed at changing people’s attitudes. Its success depends on several factors. The first
of these is the source, or communicator, of a message. To
be effective, a communicator must have credibility based
on his or her perceived knowledge of the topic, and also
be considered trustworthy. The greater the perceived
similarity between communicator and audience, the
greater the communicator’s effectiveness. This is the
principle behind politicians’ perennial attempts to portray themselves in a folksy, “down home” manner to
their constituency. This practice has come to include distinguishing and distancing themselves from “Washington insiders” who are perceived by the majority of the
electorate as being different from themselves.
In analyzing the effectiveness of the persuasive message itself, the method by which the message is presented is at least as important as its content. Factors influencing the persuasiveness of a message include whether it
presents one or both sides of an argument; whether it
states an implicit or explicit conclusion; whether or not it
provokes fear; and whether it presents its strongest arguments first or last. If the same communicator were to
present an identical message to two different groups, the
number of people whose attitudes were changed would
still vary because audience variables such as age, sex,
and intelligence also affect attitude change. Many studies have found women to be more susceptible to persuasion than men, but contrasting theories have been advanced to account for this phenomenon. Some have attributed it to the superior verbal skills of females which
may increase their ability to understand and process verbal arguments. Others argue that it is culturally determined by the greater pressure women feel to conform to
others’ opinions and expectations.
The effect of intelligence on attitude change is inconclusive. On one hand, it has been hypothesized that

the greater one’s intelligence, the more willing one is to
consider differing points of view. On the other hand,
people with superior intelligence may be less easily persuaded because they are more likely to detect weaknesses in another person’s argument. There is, however, evidence of a direct link between self-esteem and attitude
change. People with low self-esteem are often not attentive enough to absorb persuasive messages, while those
with high self-esteem are too sure of their own opinions
to be easily persuaded to change them. The most easily
persuaded individuals tend to be those with moderate
levels of self-esteem, who are likely to pay a reasonable
amount of attention to what those around them say and
remain open enough to let it change their minds.
The medium of persuasion also influences attitude
change (“the medium is the message”). Face-to-face
communication is usually more effective than mass communication, for example, although the effectiveness of
any one component of communication always involves
the interaction of all of them. The effects of persuasion
may take different forms. Sometimes they are evident
right away; at other times they may be delayed (the socalled “sleeper effect”). In addition, people may often
change their attitudes only to revert over time to their
original opinions, especially if their environment supports the initial opinion.
The information-processing model of persuasion, developed by psychologist William McGuire, focuses on a
chronological sequence of steps that are necessary for successful persuasion to take place. In order to change listeners’ attitudes, one must first capture their attention, and the
listeners must comprehend the message. They must then
yield to the argument, and retain it until there is an opportunity for action—the final step in attitude change.
Further Reading
Chapman, Elwood N. Attitude: Your Most Priceless Possession. 2nd ed. Los Altos, CA: Crisp Publications, 1990.
Eiser, J. Richard Social Psychology: Attitudes, Cognition, and
Social Behaviour. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1986.
Zimbardo, Philip G. The Psychology of Attitude Change and
Social Influence. Philadelphia: Temple University Press,
1991.

Attraction, interpersonal
A favorable attitude toward, or a fondness for, another person.

Both personal characteristics and environment play
a role in interpersonal attraction. A major determinant of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

57

Attraction, interpersonal

tion of attitude change is provided by Daryl Bem’s selfperception theory, which asserts that people adjust their
attitudes to match their own previous behavior.

Attribution theory

attraction is propinquity, or physical proximity. People
who come into contact regularly and have no prior negative feelings about each other generally become attracted
to each other as their degree of mutual familiarity and
comfort level increases. The situation in which people
first meet also determines how they will feel about each
other. One is more likely to feel friendly toward a person
first encountered in pleasant, comfortable circumstances.
People are generally drawn to each other when they
perceive similarities with each other. The more attitudes
and opinions two people share, the greater the probability that they will like each other. It has also been shown
that disagreement on important issues decreases attraction. One of the most important shared attitudes is that
liking and disliking the same people creates an especially strong bond between two individuals. The connection
between interpersonal attraction and similar attitudes is
complex because once two people become friends, they
begin to influence each other’s attitudes.
Personality type is another determinant of interpersonal attraction. In areas involving control, such as dominance, competition, and self-confidence, people tend to
pair up with their opposites. Thus, for example, the complementary pairing of a dominant person with a submissive one. People gravitate to others who are like themselves in terms of characteristics related to affiliation,
including sociability, friendliness, and warmth. Another
important factor in interpersonal attraction, especially
during the initial encounter, is that of physical appearance, even among members of the same sex. Each culture has fairly standard ideas about physical appearance
that serve as powerful determinants in how we perceive
character. Kindness, sensitivity, intelligence, modesty,
and sociability are among those characteristics that are
often attributed to physically attractive individuals in research studies. In one study, attractive job applicants
(both male and female) were given markedly preferential
treatment by prospective employers compared with
equally qualified candidates who were less attractive.
There is also evidence that physical appearance has a
greater role in the attraction of males to females than
vice versa. Behavior, as well as appearance, influences
interpersonal attraction. No matter what the circumstances are, behavior is often seen as reflecting a person’s general traits (such as kindness or aggression)
rather than as a response to a specific situation.
The type of interpersonal attraction that has particular interest to most people is attraction to the opposite
sex. To a certain extent, romantic attraction is influenced
by evolutionary considerations: the survival of the
species. Some experts claim that when people select potential mates, they look for someone whose status, physical attractiveness, and personal qualities are roughly
58

equivalent to their own. According to another theory, a
person will choose a partner who will enhance his or her
own self-image or persona. Researchers generally acknowledge a specific set of courting or flirting behaviors,
employed by both sexes to attract each other. Initially,
both men and women use varied repertoires of body language to signal interest and/or availability. Men may
stretch, exaggerate ordinary motions (such as stirring a
drink), or engage in preening motions, such as smoothing the hair or adjusting neckties, and younger men often
affect a swagger. Women draw attention to themselves
by tossing or playing with their hair, tilting their heads,
raising their eyebrows, giggling, or blushing. The first
connection is generally made through eye contact, often
an intent gaze which is then lowered or averted. If the
eye contact is positively received, a smile often follows
and a conversation is initiated.
Conversations initiated by romantic attraction are
generally light and often include laughter. If the attraction progresses, the next step is casual touching in innocuous areas such as the shoulder, wrist, or forearm.
The final step in the initial romantic attraction is known
as mirroring or body synchrony, which is a matching of
nonverbal body language. With bodies aligned and facing each other, the couple begins to move in tandem,
leaning toward each other, crossing their legs, or tilting
their heads. By these actions, the couple mutually transmit the messages that they like and are like each other.
This mirroring activity is not confined to romantic relationships. Infants begin to mirror adult behavior shortly
after birth, and the technique is consciously practiced by
therapists, salespeople, and others whose work depends
on establishing a sense of closeness with others. Generally, the adoption of each other’s postures may be seen in
virtually any grouping of individuals who feel comfortable with and are close to each other.
Further Reading
Berscheid, Ellen. Interpersonal Attraction. 2nd ed. Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1978.
Bull, Ray. The Social Psychology of Facial Appearance. New
York: Springer-Verlag, 1988.

Attribution theory
An area of cognitive therapy that is concerned with
how people explain the causes of behavior, both
their own and those of others.

A major concept in the study of attribution theory is
locus of control: whether one interprets events as being
caused by one’s own behavior or by outside circum-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Internal or external attribution is also made with respect to other people (i.e., is another person personally
responsible for a certain event, or is it caused by something beyond his or her control?). We make this sort of
attribution when we decide whether or not to blame a
friend for failing to pay back a loan. If we blame it on
her personal qualities, the attribution is internal. If we
blame it on a problem she is having, then the attribution
is external. Three factors influence whether the behavior
of others is attributed to internal or external causes: consensus, consistency, and distinctiveness. Consensus
refers to whether other people exhibit similar behavior;
consistency refers to whether the behavior occurs repeat-

edly; and distinctiveness is concerned with whether the
behavior occurs in other, similar, situations. For example, if a friend consistently fails to repay a loan, an internal attribution may be ascribed.
Further Reading
Douglas, Tom. Scapegoats: Transferring Blame. New York:
Routledge, 1995.
Hewstone, Miles, ed. Attribution Theory: Social and Functional Extensions. Oxford, England: B. Blackwell, 1983.
Lamb, Sharon. The Trouble with Blame: Victims, Perpetrators,
and Responsibility. Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1996.
McLaughlin, Mary L., Michael J. Cody, and Stephen Reed,
eds. Explaining Oneself to Others: Reason-Giving in a
Social Context. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc.,
1992.

Authoritarian personality
A personality pattern described in detail in the
1950 book of the same name that grew out of a
study of anti-Semitism.

Adolf Hitler and his troops. Authoritarian personality types project their own weaknesses onto groups they denigrate as
inferior. (Reproduced with permission.)

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

59

Authoritarian personality

stances. A person with an internal locus of control, an
“internal,” for example, will believe that her performance on a work project is governed by her ability or by
how hard she works. An “external” will attribute success
or failure by concluding that the project was easy or
hard, the boss was helpful or unhelpful, or some other
rationale. In general, an internal locus of control is associated with optimism and physical health. People with an
internal locus of control also tend to be more successful
at delaying gratification.

Autism

Theodor Adorno (1903-1969) led a team of researchers at the University of California, Berkeley, to determine whether there was a correlation between antiSemitism and certain personality traits. While the original goal had been the identification of an “anti-Semitic”
personality, the scope was widened, first from anti-Semitic to “Fascist” then to “authoritarian,” when the study
found that people prejudiced against one ethnic or racial
group were likely to be prejudiced against others as well.
A major determining factor in the formation of the
authoritarian personality was found to be a pattern of
strict and rigid parenting, in which obedience is instilled
through physical punishment and harsh verbal discipline. Little parental praise or affection is shown, independence is discouraged, and the child’s behavior is expected to meet a set standard. Significantly, such parents
instill in children not only obedience to themselves but
also a deeply entrenched sense of social hierarchy which
entails obedience to all persons of higher status. When
they reach adulthood, people with this personality structure discharge the hostility accumulated by their harsh
upbringing against those whom they perceive to be of
lower status by forming negative stereotypes of them and
discriminating against or overtly persecuting them. It is
also thought that they may be projecting their own weaknesses and fears onto the groups they denigrate as inferior. Other traits associated with this personality type include dependence on authority and rigid rules, conformity to group values, admiration of powerful figures, compulsiveness, concreteness, and intolerance of ambiguity.

The occurrence of autism is four times higher in
boys than girls. It is now believed that some of the
“wild” or “feral” children found living outdoors on their
own may have been autistic children abandoned by their
parents. The most famous of these was Victor, the “wild
boy of Aveyron,” discovered in 1799 at the age of approximately 11. Although he remained almost totally unable to speak, Victor showed great improvements in socialization and cognitive ability after working for several years with Jean-Marc-Gaspard Itard, a physician and
teacher of the deaf.
Contrary to earlier beliefs, autism is not thought to
have psychological origins, such as inadequate parenting.
Several possible causes of autism have been proposed, including phenylketonuria (an inherited metabolic disease),
exposure to rubella or certain chemicals in utero, and
hereditary predisposition. There is no accurate test for
autism, although CT scans of autistic children sometimes
reveal abnormalities in the ventricles of the brain.
Autism is usually diagnosed in children between the ages
of two and three years based on clinical observation and
parental reports. Until this point, manifestations of the
disorder are difficult to detect, and in some cases an autistic child will develop normally for the first year or two of
life. However, a break usually occurs before the age of
two and a half, when speech development (if it has
begun) stops and social responses fail to develop.

A severe psychological disorder that first appears in
early childhood and is characterized by impaired
social interaction and language development, and
other behavioral problems.

Children and adults with autism demonstrate a
marked impairment in social interaction. Generally, it
first appears in children as an inability to form a close
attachment to their parents. As infants, they may refuse
to cuddle and may react to physical contact by stiffening
their bodies and attempting to slide away. Often, autistic
children do not develop other feelings that commonly accompany emotional attachments, such as grief, sadness,
guilt, or shame, and when older, they are generally impervious to being left with strangers. There is also a lack
of interest in or a failure to form peer relationships, and
the ordinary desire to share experiences and interests
with others tends to be lacking. Autistic children lack interest and skill in games and other typical kinds of reciprocal child’s play, including imitative play. Standard
nonverbal behaviors that support social interactions—
eye contact, facial expressions, and body language—are
generally not used appropriately.

First described by Dr. Leo Kanner in 1943, autism is
a severe psychological disorder that affects an estimated four children in 10,000. Autism manifests itself in
early childhood. The autistic child is impaired socially,
in language development, and exhibits other behavioral
problems. This disorder is also known as infantile or
childhood autism and Kanner’s autism.

Language difficulties are the single symptom that
most often leads parents to seek diagnosis and help for
autistic children. The development of spoken language is
either delayed or totally absent in children with autism.
Those who can speak still have trouble listening to others and initiating or carrying on a conversation. The
speech of autistic persons often lacks normal grammatical structures and is also nonstandard in terms of such

Further Reading
Eiser, J. Richard Social Psychology: Attitudes, Cognition, and
Social Behaviour. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1986.
Stone, William F., Gerda Lederer, and Richard Christie, eds.
Strength and Weakness: the Authoritarian Personality
Today. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1993.

Autism

60

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Frith, Uta. Autism: Explaining the Enigma. Basil Blackwell, 1989.
Jordan, Rita. Understanding and Teaching Children with
Autism. New York: Wiley, 1995.

Besides social and language impairments, the other
major symptom of autism is the presence of repetitive,
ritualized patterns of behavior. These may be repeated
physical movements, such as rocking, swaying, flapping
one’s arms, or clapping. Autistic behavior may also take
such forms as arranging objects in specific patterns or
quantities, mimicking a particular action, or performing a
routine activity exactly the same way every day. Other
behavioral characteristics associated with autism are a
preoccupation with a single interest (often one for which
a large number of facts may be collected); resistance to
trivial changes in routine; fascination with a moving object (such as revolving doors) or a particular part of an
object; and a strong attachment to an inanimate object.
Persons with autism may exhibit oversensitivity to certain
stimuli (such as light or touch), unusual pickiness in eating, inappropriate fear and/or fearlessness, and self-injuring behavior, such as head banging. As many as 25 percent of autistic children develop epileptic seizures later in
life, often in adolescence, although this particular symptom appears only in those who are mentally retarded.

Further Information

Three-fourths of autistic children are mentally retarded, and 60 percent have IQ scores below 50. However, many demonstrate skill in music, mathematics, longterm memorization of trivial data, and specialized tasks
such as assembling jigsaw puzzles. Autistic children
with IQ scores of 70 and above have the best prognosis
for living and working independently as adults, although
only one in six children with autism becomes a well-adjusted adult, with another one out of six achieving a fair
degree of adjustment. Even those autistic adults who
function relatively well will still experience difficulty
with social interaction and communication, and highly
restricted interests and activities. Besides IQ, other predictors of future adjustment for autistic children are their
degree of language development, the overall severity of
their symptoms, and the types of treatment they receive.
While psychotherapy has not been of value in treating
persons with autism, behavior modification, medication, and dietary recommendations have been proven effective in controlling specific symptoms. Special education programs are able to improve the social interaction
of autistic children and enhance their academic skills.
Developmental work that includes parents has been
found to be especially helpful.
Further Reading
Autism: Nature, Diagnosis, and Treatment. New York: Guilford
Press, 1989.
Cunninghame, Karen. Autism: A World Apart. Fanlight Productions, 1988.

Autism Society of America (formerly National Society for
Autistic Children). 7910 Woodmont Avenue, Suite 650,
Bethesda, MD 20814-3015, (301) 657–0881, (800)
3328–8476.

Autoeroticism
Manual stimulation (usually self-stimulation) of the
genital organs with the intention, typically, of producing sexual arousal and orgasm.

Autoeroticism is the scientific term used to describe
masturbation, the stimulation of the genital organs to
achieve orgasm. Although masturbation was widely condemned in most premodern societies, and has been the
subject of remarkable and persistent superstitions and extreme taboos, there is evidence that contemporary attitudes toward masturbation are becoming increasingly tolerant of this behavior. Studies in the United States and
Europe indicate that about 90 percent of adolescent and
adult males and about 80 percent of adolescent and adult
females have engaged in masturbation. While masturbation is usually a private, solitary activity, it is often accompanied by fantasies of sexual activity that involve another person. Relatively few individuals consistently prefer masturbation to sexual activity that involves another
person. It has been shown that masturbation is not physically harmful, and the psychological significance of masturbation depends on how it is regarded by the individual.
Further Reading
Marcus, Irwin M., and John J. Francis, eds. Masturbation:
From Infancy to Senescence. New York: International
Universities Press, 1975.

Autonomic nervous system
The nervous system responsible for regulating automatic bodily processes, such as breathing and
heart rate. The autonomic system also involves the
processes of metabolism, or the storage and expenditure of energy.

The nervous system consists of two main structures, the central nervous system (the brain and the
spinal cord) and the peripheral nervous system (the sense
organs and the nerves linking the sense organs, muscles,
and glands to the central nervous system). The structures

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

61

Autonomic nervous system

characteristics as pitch, speed, rhythm, or stress on syllables. Echolalia (echoing other people’s voices or voices
heard on television) is also common.

Aversive conditioning

of the peripheral nervous system are further subdivided
into the autonomic nervous system (automatic bodily
processes) and the somatic nervous system.

behaviors one wants to eliminate by associating
them with physical or psychological discomfort.

The part of the autonomic nervous system that controls the storage of energy (called anabolism) is the
parasympathetic division. Parasympathetic (or anabolic)
activities involve bodily functions that occur in normal,
nonstressful situations. For example, after eating, the digestive process begins, whereby nutrients are taken from
the food and stored in the body. The flow of blood increases to the stomach and intestines while at the same
time the heart rate decreases and saliva is secreted. The
parasympathetic division also mediates sexual arousal,
even though most parasympathetic functions lead to
lower overt arousal levels. Sexual climax is controlled by
the sympathetic division.

In aversive conditioning, the client is exposed to an
unpleasant stimulus while engaging in the targeted behavior, the goal being to create an aversion to it. In
adults, aversive conditioning is often used to combat addictions such as smoking or alcoholism. One common
method is the administration of a nausea-producing drug
while the client is smoking or drinking so that unpleasant
associations are paired with the addictive behavior. In
addition to smoking and alcoholism, aversive therapy
has also been used to treat nail biting, sex addiction, and
other strong habits or addictions. In the past, electroconvulsive therapy was sometimes administered as a form
of aversion therapy for certain disorders, but this practice
has been discontinued.

In general, sympathetic processes reverse parasympathetic responses. The sympathetic division is activated
when the body mobilizes for defense or in response to
stress. Such processes use energy stored during anabolism; this use of energy is referred to as catabolism.
In defensive situations, the heart rate increases, the lungs
expand to hold more oxygen, the pupils dilate, and blood
flows to the muscles.
While the autonomic nervous system normally functions quite appropriately, abnormalities can appear. In
anxiety disorders, for example, certain somatic (bodily)
symptoms such as muscular tension, hyperventilation, increased heart rate, and high blood pressure are increased,
posing the body for attack. This physiological response
can lead to such additional maladies as headaches and digestive problems. At times, parasympathetic responses
occur simultaneously. In extreme stressful situations, for
example, an individual may experience involuntary discharge of the bladder and bowels. Some research has also
indicated deficiencies in autonomic arousal processes in
psychiatric patients prior to schizophrenic breakdown.
For decades, scientists believed that autonomic
processes were not amenable to voluntary control. In recent years, however, people with heart problems have
learned to modify heart rates, and headache sufferers
have learned to modify blood flow to relieve pain
through biofeedback techniques.
Further Reading
Biofeedback and Behavioral Medicine. New York: Aldine Pub.
Co., published annually since 1981.

62

In children aversive conditioning plays a role in
one of the most effective treatments for enuresis
(bedwetting): the bell and pad method. A pad with a
wetness sensor is placed in the child’s bed, connected
to a bell that sounds at the first sign of wetness. When
the bell rings, the child must then get out of bed and
go to the bathroom instead of continuing to wet the
bed. This method is successful in part because it associates bedwetting with the unpleasantness of being
awakened and inconvenienced in the middle of the
night. A related technique that further reinforces the
inconvenience of bedwetting is having the child
change his own sheets and pajamas when he wakes
up wet at night.
In a variation of aversive conditioning called covert
sensitization, the client imagines the undesirable behavior instead of actually engaging in it, and then either
imagines or is exposed to an unpleasant stimulus.
See also Behavior therapy
Further Reading
Doft, Norma. When Your Child Needs Help: A Parent’s Guide
to Therapy for Children. New York: Crown Paperbacks,
1992.
Feindler, Eva L., and Grace R. Kalfus, eds. Adolescent Behavior Therapy Handbook. New York: Springer, 1990.

Further Information
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 3615
Wisconsin Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20016–3007,
(202) 966–7300, (800) 333–7636.

Aversive conditioning

Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy. 15 W.
36th St., New York, NY 10018, (212) 647–1890.

Also referred to as aversion therapy, a technique
used in behavior therapy to reduce the appeal of

Federation of Families for Children’s Mental Health. 1021
Prince St., Alexandria, VA 22314–2971, (703) 684–7710.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

An individual’s response to avoid an unpleasant or
stressful situation; also known as escape learning.

Avoidance learning is the process by which an individual learns a behavior or response to avoid a stressful or
unpleasant situation. The behavior is to avoid, or to remove oneself from, the situation. Researchers have found
avoidance behavior challenging to explain, since the reinforcement for the behavior is to not experience the
negative reinforcer, or punishment. In other words, the
reinforcement is the absence of punishment. To explain
this, psychologists have proposed two stages of learning:
in stage one, the learner experiences classical conditioning; a warning, or stimulus, paired with a punishment.
The learner develops a fear response when he experiences the stimulus. In stage two, the learner experiences
operant conditioning; whereby he realizes that an action
response to the stimulus eliminates the stressful outcome.
In a common laboratory experiment conducted to
demonstrate avoidance learning, a rat is placed in a confined space with an electrified floor. A warning signal is
given, followed by an electric current passing through
the floor. To avoid being shocked, the rat must find an
escape, such as a pole to climb or a barrier to jump over
onto a nonelectric floor. At first, the rat responds only
when the shock begins, but as the pattern is repeated, the
rat learns to avoid the shock by responding to the warning signal. An example of avoidance learning in humans
is the situation when a person avoids a yard where there
is a barking dog. This learning is particularly strong in
individuals who have been attacked by a dog.
See also Drive reduction theory; Stress
Further Reading
Archer, Trevor, and Lars-Gvran Nilsson. Aversion, Avoidance,
and Anxiety: Perspective on Aversively Motivated Behavior. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1989.
Ruben, Douglas H. Avoidance Syndrome: Doing Things Out of
Fear. St. Louis, MO: W.H. Green, 1993.

Avoidant personality
A disorder characterized by the avoidance of both
social situations and close interpersonal relationships due to an excessive fear of rejection by others.

Causes and symptoms
The cause of avoidant personality disorder is not
clearly defined, and may be influenced by a combination

Diagnosis
Many individuals experience avoidant personality
characteristics at one point or another in their lives. The
occasional feelings of self-doubt and fear in new and unfamiliar social or personal relationships is not unusual,
nor is it unhealthy, as these situations may cause feelings
of inadequacy and social avoidance in even the most
self-confident individuals. Avoidant personality traits
only emerge as a disorder when they begin to have a
long-term, negative impact on the individual, cause functional impairment by significantly altering lifestyle and
impacting quality of life, and trigger feelings of distress
for the individual.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV), the standard diagnostic reference for mental health professionals in the
United States, states that at least four of the following
criteria (or symptoms) must be present in an individual
for a diagnosis of avoidant personality disorder:
• The avoidance of occupational or school activities that
involve significant interpersonal contact due to an unreasonable or excessive fear of rejection or criticism.
• An unwillingness to enter into an interpersonal relationship unless there are assurances of acceptance.
• Restraint in interpersonal situations because of an unreasonable fear of being ridiculed.
• Preoccupation with criticism and the possibility of rejection in social situations.
• Inhibition with others in interpersonal relationships due
to feelings of inadequacy.
• Self-perception of social inadequacy and inferiority to
others.
• Reluctance to participate in new activities or take any
personal risks because of a perceived risk of embarrassment.
Avoidant personality disorder can occur in conjunction with other social phobias, mood and anxiety disor-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

63

Avoidant personality

Avoidance learning

of social, genetic, and biological factors. Avoidant personality traits typically appear in childhood, with the
appearance of excessive shyness and fear of new people
and situations. However, these characteristics are also
developmentally appropriate emotions for children, and
do not necessarily mean that a pattern of avoidant personality disorder will continue into adulthood. When
shyness, unfounded fear of rejection, hypersensitivity to
criticism, and a pattern of social avoidance persists and
intensifies through adolescence and young adulthood,
avoidant personality disorder is often indicated. Between
0.5% and 1.0% of the general population suffers from
avoidant personality disorder.

Avoidant personality

ders, and personality disorders. Diagnosis may be complicated by the fact that avoidant personality disorder can
either be the cause or result of other mood and anxiety disorders. For example, individuals who suffer from major
depressive disorder may begin to withdraw from social
situations and experience feelings of worthlessness, symptoms that are also prominent features of avoidant personality disorder. On the other hand, the insecurity and isolation that are symptoms of avoidant personality disorder
can naturally trigger feelings of depression.

Treatment

Paula Ford-Martin
Further Reading

Cognitive therapy may be helpful in treating individuals with avoidant personality disorder. This therapy
assumes that the patient’s faulty thinking is causing the
personality disorder, and therefore focuses on changing
distorted cognitive patterns by examining the validity of
the assumptions behind them. If a patient feels he is inferior to his peers, unlikable, and socially unacceptable, a
cognitive therapist would test the reality of these as-

64

sumptions by asking the patient to name friends and
family who enjoy his company, or to describe past social
encounters that were fulfilling to him. By showing the
patient that others value his company and that social situations can be enjoyable, the irrationality of his social
fears and insecurities are exposed. This process is known
as cognitive restructuring.

American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders 4th ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press, Inc., 1994.

Further Information
National Mental Health Association. 1021 Prince Street,
Alexandria, VA, USA. 22314-2971, fax: (703)684-5968,
(703)684-7722, (800)969-NMHA. Email:
infoctr@nmha.org. http://www.nmha.org.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

B
Albert Bandura
1925American psychologist whose work is concentrated
in the area of social learning theory.

Albert Bandura was born in the province of Alberta,
Canada, and received his B.A. from the University of
British Columbia. He earned his M.A. and Ph.D. in clinical psychology at the University of Iowa, focusing on
social learning theories in his studies with Kenneth
Spence and Robert Sears. Graduating in 1952, Bandura
completed a one-year internship at the Wichita Guidance
Center before accepting an appointment to the department of psychology at Stanford University, where he has
remained throughout his career. In opposition to more
radical behaviorists, Bandura considers cognitive factors
as causal agents in human behavior. His area of research,
social cognitive theory, is concerned with the interaction
between cognition, behavior, and the environment.
Much of Bandura’s work has focused on the acquisition and modification of personality traits in
children, particularly as they are affected by observational learning, or modeling, which, he argues, plays a
highly significant role in the determination of subsequent behavior. While it is common knowledge that
children learn by imitating others, little formal research was done on this subject before Neal Miller and
John Dollard published Social Learning and Imitation
in 1941. Bandura has been the single figure most responsible for building a solid empirical foundation for
the concept of learning through modeling, or imitation. His work, focusing particularly on the nature of
aggression, suggests that modeling plays a highly significant role in determining thoughts, feelings, and behavior. Bandura claims that practically anything that
can be learned by direct experience can also be learned
by modeling. Moreover, learning by modeling will
occur although neither the observer nor the model is
rewarded for performing a particular action, in contrast

Albert Bandura (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

to the behaviorist learning methods of Ivan Pavlov
and B.F. Skinner, with their focus on learning through
conditioning and reinforcement. However, it has been
demonstrated that punishment and reward can have an
effect on the modeling situation. A child will more
readily imitate a model who is being rewarded for an
act than one who is being punished. Thus, the child
can learn without actually being rewarded or punished
himself—a concept known as vicarious learning. Similarly, Bandura has shown that when a model is exposed to stimuli intended to have a conditioning effect,
a person who simply observes this process, even with-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

65

Battered child syndrome

out participating in it directly, will tend to become
conditioned by the stimuli as well.
Based on his research, Bandura has developed modeling as a therapeutic device. The patient is encouraged
to modify his or her behavior by identifying with and imitating the behavior of the therapist. Although modeling
was first studied in relation to children, it has been found
to be effective in treating phobias in adults as well. The
patient watches a model in contact with a feared object,
at first under relatively non-threatening conditions. The
patient is encouraged to perform the same actions as the
model, and the situation is gradually made more threatening until the patient is able to confront the feared object or experience on his or her own.
Bandura has also focused on the human capacity for
symbolization, which can be considered a type of inverse
modeling. Using their symbolic capacities, people construct internal models of the world which provide an
arena for planning, problem-solving, and reflection and
can even facilitate communication with others. Another
area of social cognition theory explored by Bandura is
self-regulatory activity, or the ways in which internal
standards affect motivation and actions. He has studied
the effects of beliefs people have about themselves on
their thoughts, choices, motivation levels, perseverance,
and susceptibility to stress and depression. Bandura is
the author of many books, including Adolescent Aggression (1959), Social Learning and Personality (1963),
Principles of Behavior Modification (1969), Aggression
(1973), Social Learning Theory (1977), and Social Foundations of Thought and Action (1985).
See also Modeling
Further Reading
Decker, Philip J. Behavior Modeling Training. New York:
Praeger, 1985.

Battered child syndrome
A group of physical and mental symptoms arising
from long-term physical violence against a child.

Battered child syndrome occurs as the result of
long-term physical violence against a child or adolescent. An estimated 2,000 children die each year in the
United States from confirmed cases of physical abuse
and 14,000 more are seriously injured. The battering
takes many forms, including lacerations, bruises, burns,
and internal injuries. In addition to the physical harm inflicted, battered children are at risk for an array of behavioral problems, including school difficulties, drug
66

abuse, sexual acting out, running away, suicide, and becoming abusive themselves. Dissociative identity disorder, popularly known as multiple personality, is also
common among abused children.
Detecting and preventing battered child syndrome is
difficult because society and the courts have traditionally
left the family alone. Out of fear and guilt, victims rarely
report abuse. Nearly one-half of child abuse victims are
under the age of one and therefore unable to report what
is happening to them. The parents or guardians who bring
a battered child to a hospital emergency room rarely
admit that abuse has occurred. Instead, they offer complicated, often obscure, explanations of how the child hurt
himself. However, a growing body of scientific literature
on pediatric injuries is simplifying the process of differentiating between intentional and accidental injuries. For
instance, a 1991 study found that a child needs to fall
from a height of 10 ft (3m) or more to sustain the lifethreatening injuries that accompany physical abuse. Medical professionals have also learned to recognize a spiral
pattern on x rays of broken bones, indicating that the injury was the result of twisting a child’s limb.
Once diagnosed, the treatment for battered children is
based on their age and the potential for the parents or
guardians to benefit from therapy. The more amenable the
parents are to entering therapy themselves, the more likely
the child is to remain in the home. For infants, the treatment ranges from direct intervention and hospital care to
foster care to home monitoring by a social service worker
or visiting nurse. Ongoing medical assessment is recommended in all types of treatment. For the preschool child,
treatment usually takes place outside the home, whether in
a day care situation, a therapeutic preschool, or through
individual therapy. The treatment includes speech and language therapy, physical therapy, play therapy, behavior
modification, and specialized medical care.
By the time the child enters school, the physical
signs of abuse are less visible. Because these children
may not yet realize that their lives are different from
those of other children, very few will report that their
mothers or fathers are subjecting them to gross physical
injury. It is at this stage that psychiatric and behavioral
disorders begin to surface. In most cases the children are
removed from the home, at least initially. The treatment,
administered through either group or individual therapy,
focuses on establishing trust, restoring self-esteem, expressing emotions, and improving cognitive and problem-solving skills.
Recognizing and treating physical abuse in the adolescent is by far the most difficult. By now the teen is an
expert at hiding bruises. Instead, teachers and health care
professionals should be wary of exaggerated responses to
being touched, provocative actions, extreme aggressive-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Abused teens do not evoke as much sympathy as
younger victims, for society assumes that they are old
enough to protect themselves or seek help on their own.
In truth, all teenagers need adult guidance. The behavior
that the abused adolescent often engages in—delinquency, running away, and failure in school—usually evokes
anger in adults but should be recognized as symptoms of
underlying problems. The abused teen is often resistant
to therapy, which may take the form of individual psychotherapy, group therapy, or residential treatment.
While reporting child abuse is essential, false accusations can also cause great harm. It is a good idea for
anyone who suspects that a child is being physically
abused to seek confirmation from another adult, preferably a non-relative but one who is familiar with the family. If the second observer concurs, the local child protective services agency should be contacted. The agency has
the authority to verify reports of child abuse and make
decisions about protection and intervention.
Unlike many other medical conditions, child abuse
is preventable. Family support programs can provide
parenting information and training, develop family
skills, offer social support, and provide psychotherapeutic assistance before abuse occurs.
See also Child abuse
Mary McNulty
Further Reading
Ackerman, Robert J., and Dee Graham. Too Old to Cry:
Abused Teens in Today’s America. Blue Ridge Summit,
PA: TAB Books, 1990.
Helfer, Ray E., M.D., and Ruth S. Kempe, M.D., eds. The Battered
Child. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1987.
Arbetter, Sandra. “Family Violence: When We Hurt the Ones
We Love,” Current Health 22, November 1995, p. 6.

Further Information
National Committee for Prevention of Child Abuse. 332 S.
Michigan Avenue, Chicago, IL 60605, (312) 663-3520.

Nancy Bayley
1899-1994
American developmental psychologist known for
her “Scales of Mental and Motor Development.”

Nancy Bayley was a pioneer in the field of human
development. She devoted her life to documenting and
measuring intellectual and motor development in infants,
children, and adults. Her studies of the rates of physical
and mental maturation have greatly influenced our understanding of developmental processes. Her “Bayley
Scales of Mental and Motor Development” are used
throughout the world as standardized measurements of
infant development. Bayley was the recipient of numerous honors and awards throughout her career. In 1966,
she became the first woman to win the Distinguished
Scientific Contribution Award of the American Psychological Association (APA).
The third of five children of Prudence Cooper and
Frederick W. Bayley, Nancy Bayley was born in The
Dalles, Oregon, in 1899. She and her siblings were delivered by her aunt who had become a country physician
after her husband died. Bayley’s father was head of the
grocery in a department store in The Dalles. Childhood
illness prevented Bayley from attending school until she
was eight, but she quickly made up the missed grades
and completed high school in The Dalles.

Defines her niche in developmental
psychology
Although she entered the University of Washington
in Seattle with plans to become an English teacher, Bayley quickly switched to psychology after taking an introductory course with E. R. Guthrie. She earned her B.S.
degree in 1922 and her M.S. degree two years later,
while serving as a research assistant at the Gatzert Foundation for Child Welfare at the university. For her master’s thesis under Stevenson Smith, Bayley devised performance tests for preschoolers, a subject that would occupy her for the rest of her life. A graduate fellowship
then took Bayley to the State University of Iowa (now
the University of Iowa) in Iowa City where she earned
her doctoral degree in 1926. For her Ph.D. dissertation,
Bayley used the newly invented galvanometer to measure electrical skin responses to fear in children. It was
one of the first studies of its kind.
In 1926, as an instructor at the University of
Wyoming, Bayley published the first of her nearly 200
contributions to the literature of psychology. Two years
later, Harold Jones invited her to become a research associate at the Institute of Child Welfare (now the Institute of Human Development) at the University of California at Berkeley. Bayley was to remain there for most
of her career. At Berkeley she met John R. Reid, a doctoral candidate in philosophy. They married in 1929, and
Reid joined Bayley at the Institute. While at Berkeley,
Bayley taught a course on developmental assessment of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

67

Nancy Bayley

ness or withdrawal, assaulting behavior, fear of adults,
self-destruction, inability to form good peer relationships,
alertness to danger, and/or frequent mood swings. Detection is exacerbated by the fact that all teenagers exhibit
some of these signs at one time or another.

Bayley Scales of Infant Development

infants and small children in the Department of Psychology and held concurrent research positions in psychology and anatomy at Stanford University.

Initiates major study of infant development
At the Institute, Bayley began a major study of normal and handicapped infant development. It became famous as the Berkeley Growth Study. Her 1933 publication, The California First-year Mental Scale, was followed in 1936 by The California Infant Scale of Motor
Development. In these works, Bayley introduced methodologies for assessing infant development. Likewise, her
1933 publication, Mental Growth During the First Three
Years, became a milestone in developmental psychology.
Bayley earned the G. Stanley Hall Award of the APA’s Division of Developmental Psychology in 1971.
In 1954, Bayley became head of child development
in the Laboratory of Psychology at the National Institute
of Mental Health in Bethesda, Maryland. There she
worked on the National Collaborative Perinatal Project, a
study of 50,000 children from birth to age eight. The
study examined neurological and psychological disorders, including cerebral palsy and mental retardation.
The newly revised Bayley Mental and Motor Scales
were used to assess the development of hundreds of children from one to eighteen months of age. Many surviving subjects of this study continued to participate in follow-up studies. Among her many findings, Bayley
demonstrated that there were no sex-related differences
in physical and mental development. She continued to
work on this project after returning to Berkeley as the
first head of the Harold E. Jones Child Study Center at
the Institute of Human Development. She also acted as
consultant on a study of infants with Down syndrome at
the Sonoma State Hospital in California.
Bayley’s work was remarkable for its interdisciplinary nature. In 1951 she co-authored a paper with Mary
Cover Jones on the relationships between physical development and behavior. Bayley also was the first scientist
to correlate infant size with eventual adult size and in
1946 she published tables for predicting adult height.
She was very interested in physical differences between
the sexes and in androgynous characteristics that were
intermediate between male and female traits. She studied the development of emotions in children and the
maintenance of intellectual abilities throughout adulthood. Bayley also studied the impact of maternal behaviors on children. She argued forcefully that poor development in children was the result of poverty and other
social factors, rather than psychological factors.
Bayley was active in a number of professional organizations. She was a fellow of the APA and of the Ameri68

can Association for the Advancement of Science. From
1961 to 1963 Bayley served as president of the Society
for Research in Child Development and in 1983 she
earned their distinguished contribution award. She received the Gold Medal Award of the American Psychological Foundation in 1982. Bayley died of respiratory
failure in Carmel, California, in 1994.
See also Bayley Scales of Infant Development
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
O’Connell, A. N. and N. F. Russo. “Models for achievement:
eminent women in psychology.” Psychology of Women
Quarterly 5 (1980): 6-54.
Lipsitt, Lewis P. and Dorothy H. Eichorn. “Nancy Bayley
(1899-).” In Women in Psychology: A Bio-Bibliographic
Sourcebook, edited by Agnes N. O’Connell and Nancy
Felipe Russo. New York: Greenwood Press, 1990.
Rosenblith, J. F. “A singular career: Nancy Bayley.” Developmental Psychology 28 (1992): 747-58.
Stevens, G. and S. Gardner. The women of psychology. Vol. 2,
Expansion and Refinement. Cambridge, MA: Schenkman,
1982.

Bayley Scales of Infant
Development
A comprehensive developmental test for infants
and toddlers from two to 30 months of age.

The Bayley Scales of Infant Development measure
mental and physical, as well as emotional and social, development. The test, which takes approximately 45 minutes, is administered individually by having the child respond to a series of stimuli. The Mental Scales, which
measure intellectual development, assess functions such
as memory, learning, problem-solving ability, and verbal
communication skills. The Motor Scales evaluate the
child’s ability to sit and stand, perform other activities requiring coordination of the large muscles (gross motor
skills), and perform more delicate manipulations with fingers and hands (fine motor skills). Finally, the Infant Behavior Record (IBR) assesses the child’s social and emotional development through a standardized description of
his or her behavior during the testing session. Scores are
measured against norms for each of the 14 different age
groups. Often, the Bayley scales are used to determine
whether a child is developing normally and provide for
early diagnosis and intervention in cases of developmental delay, where there is significant tardiness in acquiring

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Bayley, Nancy
Further Reading
Cohen, Libby G., and Loraine J. Spenciner. Assessment of
Young Children. New York: Longman, 1994.
McCullough, Virginia. Testing and Your Child: What You Should
Know About 150 of the Most Common Medical, Educational, and Psychological Tests. New York: Plume, 1992.
Walsh, W. Bruce, and Nancy E. Betz. Tests and Assessment.
2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990.
Wortham, Sue Clark. Tests and Measurement in Early Childhood
Education. Columbus, OH: Merrill Publishing Co., 1990.

Aaron T. Beck
1921American neurologist and father of cognitive therapy.

versity. During his residency in neurology he began to
investigate psychotherapy and cognition. Beck served
as Assistant Chief of Neuropsychology at Valley Forge
Hospital in Pennsylvania during the Korean War
(1950–53). Even with his doubts about Freud and psychoanalysis, Beck attended the Philadelphia Institute of
Psychoanalysis, graduating in 1958. Not long into his
work with patients using psychoanalysis, Beck began to
alter his approach. Beck joined the faculty of the University of Pennsylvania (Penn) in 1954, where he began to
search for empirical evidence supporting Freud’s theories. In his research, Beck attempted to discover a correlation between depression and masochism. Beck and his
colleagues failed to find this correlation. Within two
years his cognitive approach to therapy had taken shape.
Beck would go on to establish the Beck Institute for
Cognitive Therapy and Research in Bala Cynwyd, a suburb of Philadelphia. Beck’s determination was simple.
For him, the unconscious does not play the role that
Freud proposed. One of Beck’s favorite maxims is
“there’s more to the surface than meets the eye.” The
cognitive method involves a person using rational
thoughts to overcome fears rather than delving into the
unconscious causes of those fears. In cognitive therapy
the fears of the client are carefully examined and confronted rationally.

A pragmatic approach to therapy
Aaron T. Beck was born in Providence, Rhode Island, on July 18, 1921, the third son of Russian Jewish
immigrants. His father was a printer by trade who seriously abided by his socialist ideals. His rather overbearing mother was known for her extreme mood swings.
Beck had two siblings who died before he was born.
Beck’s childhood typified middle-class America, complete with his involvement in Boy Scouts and athletics.
From this mediocrity rose one of America’s groundbreaking psychotherapists. Beck developed what is
known as cognitive therapy, which is used for cases
ranging from depression and panic attacks to addictions,
eating disorders, and even the most severe psychiatric
illnesses. Beck’s childhood strongly influenced his approach to therapy. A life-threatening staph infection at
the age of eight changed his life. At this point, Beck was
transformed from a very active young man to a quiet one
who preferred reading to playing football. As a child, he
developed a fear of hospitals, blood, and even the scent
of ether, which made him feel as if he would faint. Eventually, he overcame those fears rationally. “I learned not
to be concerned about the faint feeling, but just to keep
active,” he later recounted.
Beck graduated from Brown University in 1942. In
1946 he received his Ph.D. in psychiatry from Yale Uni-

A family affair
Beck and his wife, Phyllis, a Superior Court Judge in
Philadelphia, have four children and eight grandchildren.
One of his children, Dr. Judith Beck, became director at
the Beck Institute, working closely with her father. As a
younger man he was driven by his work. As an older man
he became more driven by his family. For years his main
supporter was his wife, at a time when his beliefs were
not popular. Throughout his career he has continued to
meet his critics by encouraging them to test his theories
and his results. Rather than being a boorish scientist too
smug to be proven wrong, Beck welcomes any challenges
in his pursuit of what is best for his patients.
What was originally a method to solve depression
has now evolved further. According to his daughter,
Prozac and other modern anti-depressant drugs have
changed the clientele they see at the Institute. More complicated problems bring people to their doors at the beginning of the twenty-first century. These are problems
that might take more than the usual eight to ten sessions a
relatively simple case of depression would take to resolve. Beck insists that his cognitive approach can be
used to treat psychotic disorders, even those as serious
as schizophrenia. Beck’s research conducted with Dr.
Neil A. Rector of the University of Toronto has indicated
that patients suffering from schizophrenia showed greater

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

69

Aaron T. Beck

certain skills or performing key activities. Additionally,
they can be used to qualify a child for special services
and/or demonstrate the effectiveness of those services.
Most recently, the Bayley scales have been used to insure
compliance with legislation that requires identification of
at-risk children and provision of services for them.

Clifford Beers

improvement through a combination of drug and cognitive therapies than patients receiving drug therapy alone.
Beck’s theories are constantly evolving through his
continued research efforts. A prolific writer, Beck has
authored several books and articles both on his own as
well as under collaboration. His books include Prisoners
of Hate (1999), Depression: Clinical, Experimental, and
Theoretical (1980), Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders (1979), and Depression: Causes and Treatment (1972). The Beck Depression Inventory and Scale
for Suicide Ideation are among two of the widely used
tools that he developed for use by therapists. The Beck
Depression Inventory II in 1996 followed his long-successful original as an assessment tool for clinicians in diagnosing depression.
Jane Spear
Further Reading
Beck, Aaron T., M.D. Prisoners of Hate: The Cognitive Basis
of Anger, Hostility, and Violence. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1999.
Goode, Erica. “A therapy modified for patient and times.” The
New York Times (January 11, 2000).
Goode, Erica. “Pragmatist embodies his no-nonsense therapy.
(Dr. Aaron T. Beck and his ‘cognitive therapy.’)” The New
York Times (January 11, 2000).

Clifford Beers
1876-1943
American reformer and founder of the mental hygiene movement.

Clifford Whittingham Beers was born in New
Haven, Connecticut, studied at Yale University, and
began a professional career in the insurance industry. In
1900 he was institutionalized for a mental breakdown
after a suicide attempt and diagnosed as manic-depressive. Confined to both public and private institutions
over a three-year period, Beers found the treatment of
mental patients inhumane and ineffective. When his efforts to complain directly to hospital administrators
were ignored, Beers smuggled letters out to state officials, and his efforts met with some success. By 1903
Beers was able to return to his career, but continued to
work on behalf of reforming the treatment of the mentally ill.
In 1908 Beers published A Mind That Found Itself,
a popular autobiographical study of his confinement
and recovery, which was praised by the prominent psy70

Clifford Beers (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with
permission.)

chologist and philosopher William James. After the
publication of this work, and with the general support
of the medical community, Beers became a leading figure in the movement to reform the treatment of, and attitudes toward, mental illness. In the same year his
book was published, Beers founded the Connecticut
Society for Mental Hygiene (a name suggested by the
psychologist Adolf Meyer, another supporter of
Beers’s efforts). This organization lobbied for improved treatment of mental patients and heightened
public awareness of mental illness. In 1909, Beers organized the National Committee for Mental Hygiene
and served as its secretary until 1939. He also helped
establish the American Foundation for Mental Hygiene
in 1928.
Beers’s influence eventually spread beyond the
United States. In 1918 he helped Clarence M. Hincks
found a mental hygiene society in Canada, the Canadian
National Committee for Mental Hygiene. Beers was active in organizing the International Congress on Mental
Health in 1930, and three years later received an award
for his achievements in the mental health field from the
National Institute of Social Science. Beers’s autobiography remained popular and influential, having gone into
26 printings by the time of his death in 1943.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

A treatment approach, based on the principles of
operant conditioning, that replaces undesirable behaviors with more desirable ones through positive
or negative reinforcement.

Behavior modification is based on the principles of
operant conditioning, which were developed by American behaviorist B.F. Skinner (1904-1990). In his research,
he put a rat in a cage later known as the Skinner Box, in
which the rat could receive a food pellet by pressing on a
bar. The food reward acted as a reinforcement by
strengthening the rat’s bar-pressing behavior. Skinner
studied how the rat’s behavior changed in response to differing patterns of reinforcement. By studying the way the
rats “operated on” their environment, Skinner formulated the concept of operant conditioning, through which
behavior could be shaped by reinforcement or lack of it.
Skinner considered his discovery applicable to a wide
range of both human and animal behaviors and introduced operant conditioning to the general public in his
1938 book, The Behavior of Organisms.
Today, behavior modification is used to treat a variety
of problems in both adults and children. Behavior modification has been successfully used to treat obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD), phobias, enuresis (bedwetting), anxiety disorder, and separation anxiety disorder, among others. One behavior modification technique that is widely
used is positive reinforcement, which encourages certain
behaviors through a system of rewards. In behavior therapy, it is common for the therapist to draw up a contract
with the client setting out the terms of the reward system.
In addition to rewarding desirable behavior, behavior modification can also discourage unwanted behavior,
through either negative reinforcement, or punishment.
In children, this could be removal of television privileges. The removal of reinforcement altogether is called
extinction. Extinction eliminates the incentive for unwanted behavior by withholding the expected response.
A widespread parenting technique based on extinction is
the time-out, in which a child is separated from the
group when he or she misbehaves. This technique removes the expected reward of parental attention.
See also Behaviorism
Further Reading
Martin, Garry. Behavior Modification: What It Is and How to
Do It. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1988.

Further Information
Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy. 15 W.
36th St., New York, NY 10018, (212) 279–7970.

DID SKINNER RAISE HIS OWN
CHILD IN A SKINNER BOX?
This famous urban legend was perpetuated by a
photo that appeared in Life magazine of behavioral psychologist B.F. Skinner’s two-year old daughter standing
up in a glass-fronted box. The box was, in fact, a climate-controlled, baby-sized room that Skinner built,
called the “aircrib.” The aircrib was made of sound-absorbing wood, had a humidifier, an air filter, and was
temperature-controlled by a thermostat. Dissatisfied
with traditional cribs, Skinner built the box to keep his
new daughter warm, safe, and quiet without having to
wrap her in clothes and blankets. Skinner was quoted in
New Yorker magazine as saying his daughter “…spent
most of the next two years and several months there,
naked and happy.” Deborah was so happy in the box,
Skinner reported, that she rarely cried or got sick and
showed no signs of agoraphobia when removed from
the aircrib or claustrophobia when placed inside. The
box-like structure and people’s misunderstandings about
behavioral psychology contributed to the misconception
that Skinner was experimenting on his daughter and also
probably prevented the crib from becoming a commercial success. People got the impression that Skinner was
raising his child in a box similar to the kind he used to
study animal behavior—with levers for releasing food.

Behavior therapy
A goal-oriented, therapeutic approach that treats
emotional and behavioral disorders as maladaptive
learned responses that can be replaced by healthier
ones with appropriate training.

In contrast to the psychoanalytic method of Sigmund Freud (1856-1939), which focuses on unconscious mental processes and their roots in the past, behavior therapy focuses on observable behavior and its
modification in the present. Behavior therapy was developed during the 1950s by researchers and therapists critical of the psychodynamic treatment methods that prevailed at the time. It drew on a variety of theoretical
work, including the classical conditioning principles of
the Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov (1849-1936), who
became famous for experiments in which dogs were
trained to salivate at the sound of a bell, and the work of
American B.F. Skinner (1904-1990), who pioneered the
concept of operant conditioning, in which behavior is
modified by changing the response it elicits. By the
1970s, behavior therapy enjoyed widespread popularity
as a treatment approach. Over the past two decades, the
attention of behavior therapists has focused increasingly

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

71

Behavior therapy

Behavior modification

Behaviorism

on their clients’ cognitive processes, and many therapists
have begun to use cognitive behavior therapy to change
clients’ unhealthy behavior by replacing negative or selfdefeating thought patterns with more positive ones.
As an initial step in many types of behavioral therapy, the client monitors his or her own behavior carefully,
often keeping a written record. The client and therapist
establish a set of specific goals that will result in gradual
behavior change. The therapist’s role is often similar to
that of a coach or teacher who gives the client “homework assignments” and provides advice and encouragement. Therapists continuously monitor and evaluate the
course of the treatment itself, making any necessary adjustments to increase its effectiveness.
A number of specific techniques are commonly used
in behavioral therapy. Human behavior is routinely motivated and rewarded by positive reinforcement. A more
specialized version of this phenomenon, called systematic positive reinforcement, is used by behavior-oriented
therapists. Rules are established that specify particular
behaviors that are to be reinforced, and a reward system
is set up. With children, this sometimes takes the form of
tokens that may be accumulated and later exchanged for
certain privileges. Just as providing reinforcement
strengthens behaviors, withholding it weakens them.
Eradicating undesirable behavior by deliberately withholding reinforcement is another popular treatment
method called extinction. For example, a child who habitually shouts to attract attention may be ignored unless
he or she speaks in a conversational tone.
Aversive conditioning employs the principles of
classical conditioning to lessen the appeal of a behavior
that is difficult to change because it is either very habitual or temporarily rewarding. The client is exposed to an
unpleasant stimulus while engaged in or thinking about
the behavior in question. Eventually the behavior itself
becomes associated with unpleasant rather than pleasant
feelings. One treatment method used with alcoholics is
the administration of a nausea-inducing drug together
with an alcoholic beverage to produce an aversion to the
taste and smell of alcohol by having it become associated with nausea. In counterconditioning, a maladaptive
response is weakened by the strengthening of a response
that is incompatible with it. A well-known type of counterconditioning is systematic desensitization, which
counteracts the anxiety connected with a particular behavior or situation by inducing a relaxed response to it
instead. This method is often used in the treatment of
people who are afraid of flying. Modeling, another treatment method, is based on the human tendency to learn
through observation and imitation. A desired behavior is
performed by another person while the client watches. In
72

some cases, the client practices the behavior together
with a model, who is often the therapist.
Further Reading
Ammerman, Robert T. and Michel Hersen, eds. Handbook of
Behavior Therapy with Children and Adults: A Developmental and Longitudinal Perspective. New York: Allyn
and Bacon, 1993.
Craighead, Linda W. Cognitive and Behavioral Interventions:
An Empirical Approach to Mental Health Problems.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1994.
O’Leary, K. Daniel and G. Terence Wilson. Behavior Therapy:
Application and Outcome. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1975.
Wolpe, Joseph. The Practice of Behavior Therapy. Tarrytown,
NY: Pergamon Press, 1996.

Further Information
Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy. 15 W.
36th St., New York, NY 10018, (212) 647-1890.

Behaviorism
A theory of human development initiated by American educational psychologist Edward Thorndike,
and developed by American psychologists John
Watson and B.F. Skinner.

Behaviorism is a psychological theory of human development that posits that humans can be trained, or conditioned, to respond in specific ways to specific stimuli
and that given the correct stimuli, personalities and behaviors of individuals, and even entire civilizations, can
be codified and controlled.
Edward Thorndike (1874-1949) initially proposed
that humans and animals acquire behaviors through the
association of stimuli and responses. He advanced two
laws of learning to explain why behaviors occur the way
they do: The Law of Effect specifies that any time a behavior is followed by a pleasant outcome, that behavior
is likely to recur. The Law of Exercise states that the
more a stimulus is connected with a response, the
stronger the link between the two. Ivan Pavlov’s (18491936) groundbreaking work on classical conditioning
also provided an observable way to study behavior. Although most psychologists agree that neither Thorndike
nor Pavlov were strict behaviorists, their work paved the
way for the emergence of behaviorism.
The birth of modern behaviorism was championed
early in the 20th century by a psychologist at Johns Hopkins University named John Watson. In his 1924 book,
Behaviorism, Watson made the notorious claim that,
given a dozen healthy infants, he could determine the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Westen, Drew. Is Anyone Really Normal?: Perspectives on Abnormal Psychology. Kearneysville, WV: The Teaching
Company, 1991. (Four audio cassettes and one 13-page
booklet).

Later, the behaviorist approach was taken up by B.F.
Skinner (1904-1990) who deduced the evolution of
human behavior by observing the behavior of rats in a
maze. Skinner even wrote a novel, Walden Two, about a
Utopian society where human behavior is governed totally by self-interested decisions based on increasing
pleasure. The book increased Skinner’s renown and led
many to believe that behaviorism could indeed produce
such a society.

The complete name of this test is Bender Visual
Motor Gestalt Test. It is a test used with all age groups to
help identify possible learning disabilities, neurological
disorders, mental retardation, or developmental delay.
Test results also provide information about specific abilities, including motor coordination, memory, and organization. The test-taker is given a series of nine designs,
each on a separate card, and asked to reproduce them on
a blank sheet of paper. There is no time limit. The test is
scored by professionals who consider a variety of factors, including form, shape, pattern, and orientation on
the page.

In the 1950s, however, the popularity of behaviorism
began to decline. The first sustained attack on its tenets
was made by Noam Chomsky (1928-), a renowned linguist, who demonstrated that the behaviorist model simply could not account for the acquisition of language.
Other psychologists soon began to question the role of
cognition in behavior.
Today, many psychologists debate the extent to
which cognitive learning and behavioral learning affect
the development of personality.

Bender-Gestalt Test
Diagnostic assessment test to identify learning disability, neurological disorders, and developmental
delay.

See also Learning disability
Further Reading
Lacks, Patricia. Bender Gestalt Screening for Brain Dysfunction. New York: Wiley, 1984.

See also Behavior modification; Behavior therapy
Further Reading
Donahoe, John W., and David C. Palmer. Learning and Complex Behavior. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1994.
Nye, Robert D. Three Psychologies: Perspectives from Freud,
Skinner, and Rogers. 4th ed. Pacific Grove, CA:
Brooks/Cole Pub. Co., 1992.
Rachlin, Howard. Introduction to Modern Behaviorism. 3rd ed.
New York: Freeman, 1991.
Sapolsky, Robert M. Biology and Human Behavior: The Neurological Origins of Individuality. Springfield, VA: The
Teaching Company, 1996. (Four audio cassettes and one
32-page manual).
Staddon, John. Behaviorism: Mind, Mechanism and Society.
London: Duckworth, 1993.
Todd, James T., and Edward K. Morris. Modern Perspectives
on B.F. Skinner and Contemporary Behaviorism. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1995.
Todd, James T., and Edward K. Morris. Modern Perspectives
on John B. Watson and Classical Behaviorism. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press, 1994.

Bestiality
See Paraphilias

Bruno Bettelheim
1903-1990
Austrian-born American psychologist known for his
treatment of emotionally disturbed children, particularly autistic children.

Bruno Bettelheim was born in Vienna in 1903. He
was trained as a psychoanalyst, receiving his Ph.D. from
the University of Vienna in 1938. In the same year, the
Nazis conquered Austria, and Bettelheim was interned in
the Dachau and Buchenwald concentration camps. He
was released in 1939 and emigrated to the United States,
where he first became a research associate of the Pro-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

73

Bruno Bettelheim

adult personalities of each one, “regardless of his talents,
penchants, tendencies, abilities, vocations and the race of
his ancestors.” While making such a claim seems ridiculous today, at the time Watson was reacting to emerging
Freudian psychoanalytical theories of development,
which many people found threatening. Watson’s scheme
rejected all the hidden, unconscious, and suppressed
longings that Freudians attributed to behaviors and posited that humans respond to punishments and rewards. Behavior that elicits positive responses is reinforced and
continued, while behavior that elicits negative responses
is eliminated.

Bilingualism/Bilingual education

tion camp experiences. Children of the Dream (1969) analyzes communal childrearing methods on an Israeli kibbutz and their implications for American family life. The
Uses of Enchantment (1976) argues for the importance
of fairy tales in a child’s development. Bettelheim’s later
books include On Learning to Read: The Child’s First
Fascination with Meaning (1981) and Freud and Man’s
Soul (1982). A full professor at the University of Chicago from 1952, Bettelheim retired from both teaching and
directorship of the Orthogenic School in 1973. Following the death of his wife in 1984 and after suffering a
stroke in 1987, Bettelheim committed suicide in 1990.
See also Adaptation; Autism
Further Reading
Sutton, Nina. Bettelheim, A Life and a Legacy. New York:
Basic Books, 1996.

Bilingualism/Bilingual
education
Use of a language other than English in public
school classrooms.

Bruno Bettelheim (AP/Wide World Photos, Inc. Reproduced
with permission.)

gressive Education Association at the University of
Chicago, and then an associate professor at Rockford
College from 1942 to 1944.
In 1943, Bettelheim gained widespread recognition
for his article, “Individual and Mass Behavior in Extreme Situations,” a study of human adaptability based
on his concentration camp experiences. In 1944, he was
granted a dual appointment by the University of Chicago
as assistant professor and head of the Sonia Shankman
Orthogenic School, a residential treatment center for 6 to
14-year-old children with severe emotional problems.
Here he successfully treated many children unresponsive
to previous therapy, using the technique—which has
been both lauded and criticized—of unconditionally accepting their behavior. Bettelheim was also concerned
with the emotional lives and upbringing of normal children, and with applying psychoanalytic principles to social problems.
In three decades as an author of works for both
scholarly and popular audiences, Bettelheim covered a
broad range of topics. Love Is Not Enough (1950), Truants from Life (1954), and The Empty Fortress (1967) are
based on his work at the Orthogenic School. The Informed Heart (1960) deals with Bettelheim’s concentra74

The language rights of ethnic minorities in the United States have been a source of public controversy for
close to two decades. The 1970s saw record levels of immigration, bringing an estimated 4 million legal and 8
million illegal immigrants into the country. To accommodate this dramatic surge in the nation’s population of
foreign language speakers, language assistance has been
mandated on the federal, state, and local levels in areas
ranging from voting and tax collection to education, social services, disaster assistance, and consumer rights.
Today Massachusetts offers driver’s license tests in 24
languages; residents of California can choose one of six
different languages when they vote; street signs in some
parts of Miami are printed in both English and Spanish;
and classroom instruction is taught in 115 different languages in New York City schools. Altogether, over 300
languages are spoken in the United States. As of 1990,
31.8 million Americans spoke a language other than
English at home, and the country’s population included
6.7 million non-English speakers. Nationwide, one-third
of the children enrolled in urban schools speak a language other than English at home as their first language.
Around 2.6 million schoolchildren throughout the country do not speak English at all.
Organized opposition to bilingualism, which collectively became known as the English-Only movement,
began in the 1980s. In 1980 voters in Dade County,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The government program that has drawn the most
fire is bilingual education, which costs taxpayers an estimated $200 million a year in federal funds and billions of
dollars in state and local expenditures. Bilingual education programs, which allow students to pursue part of
their study in their first language and part in English,
were first mandated by Congress in 1968. The constitutionality of bilingual education was upheld in a 1974
Supreme Court ruling affirming that the city of San Francisco had discriminated against 18,000 Chinese-American students by failing to make special provisions to help
them overcome the linguistic barriers they faced in
school. However, the court did not specify what these
provisions should be, and educators have evolved several
different methods of instruction for students with first
languages other than English. With the immersion (or
“sink or swim”) approach, nearly all instruction is in
English, and the students are expected to pick up the language through intensive exposure. If the teacher is bilingual, the students may be allowed to ask questions in
their native language, but the teacher is supposed to answer them in English. The English as a Second Language
(ESL) approach, often used in a class where students
speak more than one foreign language, takes a more gradual approach to mastering English, using it in conjunction
with the student’s first language. English-only instruction
may be offered, but only in some, rather than all, classes.
The remaining methods rely more heavily on the
student’s first language. Even though, technically, all
teaching methods aimed at meeting the needs of foreign
language speakers are considered bilingual education,
participants in debates about bilingual education often
single out the following methods as targets of praise or
criticism. In Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE),
students study English but are taught all other academic
subjects in their native languages until they are consid-

ered ready to switch to English. In some cases, bilingual
teachers also help the students improve their skills in
their native language. Bilingual/bicultural programs use
the students’ native languages not only to teach them the
standard curriculum but also for special classes about
their ethnic heritage and its history and culture. Two-way
or dual language programs enroll students from different
backgrounds with the goal of having all of them become
bilingual, including those who speak only English. For
example, Spanish-speaking children may learn English
while their English-speaking classmates learn Spanish.
Critics of bilingual education (or of those methods
that rely heavily on the students’ native languages) claim
that it fails to provide children with an adequate knowledge of English, thus disadvantaging them academically,
and they cite high dropout rates for Hispanic teenagers,
the group most likely to have received instruction in their
native language. They accuse school systems of continuing to promote bilingual programs to protect the jobs of
bilingual educators and receive federal funding allocated
for such programs. As evidence of this charge, they cite
barriers placed in the way of parents who try to remove
their children from bilingual programs. Hispanic parents
in New York City have claimed that their children are
being railroaded into bilingual programs by a system that
requires all children with Spanish surnames, as well as
children of any nationality who have non-English-speaking family members, to take a language proficiency
exam. Children scoring in the bottom 40% are then required to enroll in bilingual classes even if English is the
primary language spoken at home. Critics of bilingual instruction also cite a 1994 New York City study that reported better results for ESL instruction than for methods
that taught children primarily in their native languages.
In spite of the criticism it has aroused, bilingual education is strongly advocated by many educators. Defenders cite a 1991 study endorsed by the National Academy
of Sciences stating that children who speak a foreign language learn English more rapidly and make better overall academic progress when they receive several years of
instruction in their native language. A later study, conducted at George Mason University, tracked 42,000 children who had received bilingual instruction and reported
that the highest scores on standardized tests in the
eleventh grade were earned by those students who had
had six years of bilingual education. Programs with twoway bilingual education have had particularly impressive
results. Oyster Bilingual Elementary School in Washington, D.C., (whose student body is 58% Hispanic, 26%
white, 12% black, and 4% Asian) is admiringly cited as a
model for bilingual education. Its sixth graders read at a
ninth-grade level and have tenth-grade-level math skills.
Experts on both sides of the controversy agree that for

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

75

Bilingualism/Bilingual education

Florida, designated English as their official language.
The following year, U.S. Senator S.I. Hayakawa of California introduced a constitutional amendment to make
English the country’s official language. Two influential
English-Only lobbying groups were formed: U.S. English, in 1983, and English First, in 1986. In 1986, with
the passage of Proposition 63, English became the official language of California. By the mid-1990s, 22 states
had passed similar measures. In August 1996, the U.S.
House of Representatives, by a margin of 259-169,
passed a bill to make English the official language of the
federal government. (However, President Bill Clinton
vowed to veto the bill if it passed the Senate.) Observers
attribute the English-Only movement to backlash against
immigration and affirmative action, spurred by fear of
competition for jobs and resentment of government
spending on bilingual programs.

Alfred Binet

any teaching method to be successful, the teaching must
be done by qualified instructors equipped with adequate
teaching materials in appropriately assigned classes with
a reasonable ratio of students to teachers.
Further Reading
Chavez, Linda. Out of the Barrio: Toward a New Politics of
Hispanic Assimilation. New York: Basic Books, 1991.
Crawford, James. Hold Your Tongue: Bilingualism and the Politics of “English-Only.” Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Publishing Co., 1992.
Harlan, Judith. Bilingualism in the United States: Conflict and
Controversy. New York: Franklin Watts, 1991.
Lang, Paul. The English Language Debate: One Nation, One
Language! Springfield, NJ: Enslow Publishers, Inc., 1995.
Porter, Rosalie Pedalino. Forked Tongue: The Politics of Bilingual Education. New York: Basic Books, 1990.
Rodriguez, Richard. Hunger of Memory: The Education of
Richard Rodriguez. New York: Bantam Books, 1983.
Simon, Paul. The Tongue-Tied American: Confronting the Foreign Language Crisis. New York: Continuum, 1980.

Further Information
Multicultural Education, Training, and Advocacy, Inc.
(META). 240A Elm Street, Suite 22, Somerville, MA
02144.
National Association for Bilingual Education (NABE). Union
Center Plaza, 1220 L Street NW, Suite 605, Washington,
DC 20005.
U.S. English. 818 Connecticut Ave. NW, Suite 200, Washington, DC 20006.

Alfred Binet
1857-1911
French psychologist and founder of experimental
psychology in France and a pioneer in intelligence
testing.

Alfred Binet was born in Nice, France, in 1857.
After studying both law and medicine in Paris, he earned
a doctorate in natural science. Binet’s psychological
training—mostly at Jean-Martin Charcot’s neurological
clinic at the Salpetriere Hospital—was in the area of abnormal psychology, particularly hysteria, and he published books on hypnosis (Le magnetisme animal, with
C.S. Fere in 1886) and suggestibility (La suggestibilite,
1900). From 1895 until his death in 1911, Binet served
as director of France’s first psychological laboratory at
the Sorbonne of the University of Paris. Also in 1895, he
established the journal L’Annee psychologique. Binet
had been interested in the psychology of—and individual
differences in— intelligence since the 1880s and published articles on emotion, memory, attention, and
problem solving. In 1899 he set up a special laboratory
76

Alfred Binet

where he devised a series of tests which he used to evaluate the intellectual development of his two daughters.
His 1903 book, L’Etude experimentale de l’intelligence,
was based on his studies of them.
In 1905, Binet and Theodore Simon created the first
intelligence test to aid the French government in establishing a program to provide special education for mentally retarded children. In 1908 they revised the test, expanding it from a single scale of measurement to a battery of tests for children in different age groups, with the
focus now shifted from identifying retardation to the
general measurement of intelligence. A further test revision in 1911 introduced the concept of mental age. In
1916, the American psychologist Lewis Terman used
the 1908 Binet-Simon scale as the basis for the StanfordBinet Intelligence Scale, the best-known and most researched intelligence test in the United States. Binet coauthored Les enfants anormaux (Abnormal Children)
(1907) with Simon and published Les idees modernes
sur les enfants (Modern Ideas on Children) in 1909. He
died in Paris in 1911.
See also Intelligence quotient; Mental retardation
Further Reading
Wolf, Theta Holmes. Alfred Binet. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1973.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Properties of the visual system that facilitate depth
perception by the nature of messages that are sent
to the brain.

Binocular depth cues are based on the simple fact
that a person’s eyes are located in different places. One
cue, binocular disparity, refers to the fact that different
optical images are produced on the retinas of both eyes
when viewing an object. By processing information
about the degree of disparity between the images it receives, the brain produces the impression of a single object that has depth in addition to height and width.
The second cue, called binocular convergence, is
based on the fact that in order to project images on the
retinas, the two eyes must rotate inward toward each
other. The closer the perceived object is, the more they
must rotate, so the brain uses the information it receives
about the degree of rotation as a cue to interpret the distance of the perceived objects. Yet another cue to depth
perception is called binocular accommodation, a term
that refers to the fact that the lens of the eye changes
shape when it brings an image into focus on the retina.
The muscular activity necessary for this accommodation
acts as a signal for the brain to generate perception of
depth and distance.
See also Vision
Further Reading
Bennett, Jill. Sight. Morristown, NJ: SilverBurdett, 1986.
Chalkley, Thomas. Your Eyes. 3rd ed. Springfield, IL: C.C.
Thomas, 1995.
Elkins, James. The Object Stares Back: On the Nature of Seeing. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996.

Biofeedback
A technique that allows individuals to monitor
their own physiological processes so they can learn
to control them.

Biofeedback originated with the field of psychophysiology, which measures physiological responses
as a way of studying human behavior. Types of behavior
that may be studied in this way range from basic emotional responses to higher cognitive functions. Today,
biofeedback is also associated with behavioral medicine,
which combines behavioral and biomedical science in
both clinical and research settings. In biofeedback training, the monitoring of physiological responses is performed for therapeutic instead of (or in addition to) in-

BINOCULAR DISPARITY
DEMONSTRATION
This simple experiment demonstrates binocular
disparity. Hold a pencil about 12 inches (30 cm) from
your face. With one eye closed, align the pencil with
the edge of a doorway, window, or other vertical line in
the room. Close the eye, open the other, and observe
the position of the pencil: it will have jumped. Binocular disparity describes this phenomenon of different images of the pencil in each eye.

vestigative purposes. Biofeedback has been applied with
success to a variety of clinical problems, ranging from
migraine headaches to hypertension.
The technique provides people with continuous information about physiological processes of which they
are normally unaware, such as blood pressure or heart
rate. Through special equipment, these processes are
recorded, and the information is relayed back to the person through a changing tone or meter reading. With
practice, people learn strategies that enable them to
achieve voluntary control over the processes involved.
For example, persons trying to control their blood pressure levels may see a light flash whenever the pressure
drops below a certain level. They may then try to remember and analyze what their thoughts or emotions were at
that moment and deliberately repeat them to keep the
pressure level low. Initially, they may simply be asked to
try and keep the light flashing for as long as possible and
given verbal reinforcement for their efforts.
The biofeedback training may continue for several
days or weeks, with the subjects trying to keep the light
flashing for longer periods in subsequent sessions. Eventually they will need to produce the desired response
without electronic feedback, a goal which can be accomplished through various methods. They may practice the
learned response at the end of the training session or at
home between sessions. There can also be random trials
without feedback during the sessions. An alternate strategy is the gradual and systematic removal of the feedback
signal during the training sessions over a period of time.
After the initial training is completed, subjects may return to the biofeedback facility to assess their retention
of the skills they have learned or for additional training.
Biofeedback training has been used in treating a
number of different clinical problems. Monitoring of patients’ heart rates has been used with some success to
help people suffering from heartbeat irregularities, including premature ventricular contractions (PVCs) and
tachycardia, while hypertensive individuals have been

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

77

Biofeedback

Binocular depth cues

Bipolar disorder

Another type of biofeedback involves the monitoring of brain activity through electroencephalographs
(EEGs). A reduction of seizures in epileptics has been
reported through biofeedback techniques involving EEG
activity near the sensorimotor cortex, known as sensory
motor rhythm. Brain wave activity has also been of interest in connection with alpha waves, which are thought to
characterize a desirable state of relaxed alertness. Patients have been taught to increase their alpha rhythms in
three or four 30-minute conditioning sessions.
Further Reading
Andreassi, John L. Psychophysiology: Human Behavior and
Physiological Response. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1980.
Beatty, J., and H. Legewie, eds. Biofeedback and Behavior.
New York: Plenum Press, 1977.

A patient undergoing biofeedback. (Photo by Will & Deni
McIntyre. Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

able to control high blood pressure through the use of
biofeedback. Clinicians have been particularly successful in their use of neuromuscular feedback to treat complaints arising from tension in specific muscles or muscle groups. Tension headaches have been alleviated
through the reduction of frontalis (forehead) tension, and
relaxation of the face and neck muscles has been helpful
to stutterers. Feedback from muscle groups has been
helpful in the rehabilitation of stroke patients and other
persons with neuromuscular disorders such as foot drop.
These patients may be unable to relax or contract muscles at will, and biofeedback can make them aware of
small, otherwise imperceptible changes in the desired direction and allow them to repeat and eventually increase
such changes.
In addition to its alleviation of physical complaints,
neuromuscular biofeedback has been an effective tool in
the treatment of chronic anxiety, even when it has resisted psychotherapy and medication. By learning deep
muscle relaxation, anxious patients, including those suffering from related conditions such as insomnia, have
seen a reduction in their symptoms. Even for patients
who have been able to achieve relaxation through other
means, such as meditation or progressive relaxation,
biofeedback can be a valuable supplementary technique
that offers special advantages, such as allowing a therapist to track closely the points at which a patient tenses
up and try to learn what thoughts are associated with the
tension. Biofeedback-induced relaxation of forehead
muscles has also been effective in treating asthma.
78

Bipolar disorder
A condition (traditionally called manic depression)
in which a person alternates between the two emotional extremes of depression and mania (an elated, euphoric mood).

Bipolar disorder is classified among affective disorders in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . The
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) estimates
that about one in one hundred people will develop the
disorder, which affects some two million Americans.
While this condition occurs equally in both males and females and in every ethnic and racial groups, it is more
common among well-educated, middle- and upper-income persons. Those suffering from untreated bipolar
disorder will generally experience an average of four depression/ mania episodes in a ten-year period. However,
some people go through four or more mood swings a
month, while others may only experience a mood swing
every five years. The onset of bipolar disorder usually
occurs in the teens or early twenties.
Of all types of depressive illness, bipolar disorder is
the one that is most likely to have biological origins,
specifically an imbalance in the brain’s chemistry. Genetic factors play an important role in the disease. In one
study, one-fourth of the children who had one manic-depressive parent became manic-depressive themselves,
and three-fourths of those with two manic-depressive
parents developed the disorder. The likelihood of bipolar
disorder being shared by identical twins is also exceptionally high. Manic depression has also been associated

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The depressed state of a person suffering from bipolar disorder resembles major depression. It is characterized by feelings of sadness, apathy, and loss of energy.
Other possible symptoms include sleep disturbances;
significant changes in appetite or weight; languid movements; feelings of worthlessness or inappropriate guilt;
lack of concentration; and preoccupation with death or
suicide. When they shift to a manic state, people with
bipolar disorder become elated and overly talkative,
speaking loudly and rapidly and abruptly switching from
one topic to another. Plunging into many work, social, or
academic activities at once, they are in constant motion
and are hyperactive. They also demonstrate grandiosity—
an exaggerated sense of their own powers, which leads
them to believe they can do things beyond the power of
ordinary persons. Other common symptoms include excessive and/or promiscuous sexual behavior and out-ofcontrol shopping sprees in which large amounts of
money are spent on unnecessary items. People in a
manic phase typically become irritable or angry when
others try to tone down their ideas or behavior, or when
they have difficulty carrying out all the activities they
have begun. Mania may also be accompanied by delusions and hallucinations.
Mania creates enormous turmoil in the lives of its
victims, many of whom turn to drugs or alcohol as a way
of coping with the anxiety generated by their condition—61 percent of persons with bipolar disorder have
substance abuse or dependency problems. In addition, 15
percent of those who fail to receive adequate treatment
for bipolar disorder commit suicide. The disease may be
misdiagnosed as schizophrenia, unipolar depression, a
personality disorder, or drug or alcohol dependence. Individuals commonly suffer from it for as long as seven to
ten years without being diagnosed or treated.
However, effective treatment is available. Lithium,
which stabilizes the brain chemicals involved in mood
swings, is used to treat both the mania and depression of
bipolar disorder. This drug, which is taken by millions of
people throughout the world, halts symptoms of mania in
70 percent of those who take it, usually working within
one to three weeks—sometimes within hours. Antipsychotic drugs or benzodiazepines (tranquilizers) may initially be needed to treat cases of full-blown mania until
lithium can take effect. Persons taking lithium must have
their blood levels, as well as kidney and thyroid functions, monitored regularly, as there is a relatively narrow
gap between toxic and therapeutic levels of the drug.
Since lithium also has the ability to prevent future manic
episodes, it is recommended as maintenance therapy even
after manic-depressive symptoms subside. Some persons

resist remaining on medication, however, either because
they fear of becoming dependent on the drug or because
they are reluctant to give up the “highs” or alleged creativity of the manic state. However, psychiatrists have reported instances in which lithium was not as effective
after being discontinued as it had been initially.
Many great artists, writers, musicians, and other
people prominent in both creative and other fields have
suffered from bipolar disorder, including composers
Robert Schumann and Gustav Mahler, painter Vincent
van Gogh, writers Virginia Woolf and Sylvia Plath, and
actresses Patty Duke and Kristy McNichol. The NIMH
reports that 38 percent of all Pulitzer Prize-winning
poets have had the symptoms of bipolar disorder.
Further Reading
Duke, Patty. Call Me Anna. New York: Bantam, 1987.
Jamison, Kay. Touched with Fire: Manic-Depressive Illness and
the Artistic Temperament. New York: Free Press, 1993.

Birth order
A chronological sequence of the birth of children
in a family.

Research has correlated birth order with such aspects of life as temperament and behavior. For example,
first-born children, when compared to their siblings, tend
to score slightly higher on intelligence tests and to attain
a slightly higher socioeconomic status. Some psychologists believe that birth order is a significant factor in the
development of personality.
The psychologist Alfred Adler pioneered a study of
relationships between birth order and personality. As part
of his view that patients need to be understood in the context of their family environments, Adler hypothesized that
a child’s position in the family is associated with certain
problems that are responded to in similar ways by other
children in the same birth position. Adler stressed that it
was not the numerical birth position itself that mattered
but rather the situation that tended to accompany that position, and the child’s reaction to it. Thus, for example,
first-born children, when compared to their siblings, tend
to have a greater chance of developing feelings of inferiority as their focal position in the family structure is altered by the birth of a sibling. Later-born children, on the
other hand, tend to have stronger social skills, having had
to deal with siblings throughout their lives, as opposed to
first-borns, who have their parents to themselves initially
and thus have their first socialization experiences with
adults only. Later-borns, having had to compromise more
at home, are better equipped to develop the flexibility that

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

79

Birth order

with the “biological clock” that synchronizes body
rhythms and external events.

Birth order

SIBLING RIVALRY
Sibling rivalry is a normal part of family life. All children become jealous of the love and attention that siblings receive from parents and other adults. When a new
baby is brought home, older children feel betrayed by
their parents and become angry, directing their anger first
toward the parents and later toward the intruder who is
usurping their position. Jealousy, resentment, and competition are most intense between siblings spaced less than
three years apart. Although a certain amount of sibling rivalry is unavoidable, there are measures that parents can
take to reduce its severity and its potential effects on their
children.
An older child should be prepared for a new addition
to the family by having the situation explained and being
told in advance about who will take care of her while her
mother is in the hospital having the baby. The child’s regular routine should be disturbed as little as possible; it is
preferable for the child to stay at home and under the care
of the father or another close family member. If there is to
be a new babysitter or other caretaker unknown to the
child, it is helpful for them to meet at least once in advance. If sibling visits are allowed, the child should be
taken to visit the mother and new baby in the hospital.
Once the new baby is home, it is normal for an older
child to feel hurt and resentful at seeing the attention lavished on the newcomer by parents, other relatives, and family friends. It is not uncommon for the emotional turmoil of
the experience to cause disturbances in eating or sleeping.
Some children regress developmentally, temporarily losing
such attainments as weaning, bowel and bladder control, or
clear speech, in an attempt to regain lost parental attention
by becoming babies again themselves.
There are a number of ways to ease the unavoidable
jealousy of children whose lives have been disrupted by
the arrival of a younger sibling. When friends or relatives
visit to see the new baby, parents can make the older

can make their subsequent relationships more successful.
It has also been posited that birth order influences one’s
choice of a marriage partner. The “duplication hypothesis” advanced by Walter Toman (1976) states that people
seek to duplicate their sibling relationships in marriage, a
duplication that includes birth order.
More specific research on the effects of birth order
has generally focused on five ordinal birth positions:
first-born, second-born, middle, last, and only-born child
in a family. Studies have consistently linked first-born
children and academic achievement. The number of firstborn National Merit Scholarship winners was found to
80

child feel better by cuddling him or giving him special attention, including a small present to offset the gifts received by the baby. The older child’s self-esteem can be
bolstered by involving him in the care of newborn in
modest ways, such as helping out when the baby is being
diapered or dressed, or helping push the carriage. The
older child should be made to feel proud of the attainments and responsibilities that go along with his more
advanced age—things the new baby can’t do yet because
he is too young. Another way to make older children feel
loved and appreciated is to set aside some “quality time”
to spend alone with each of them on a regular basis. It is
also important for parents to avoid overtly comparing
their children to each other, and every effort should be
made to avoid favoritism.
In general, the most stressful aspect of sibling rivalry
is fighting. (Physical—as opposed to verbal—fights usually peak before the age of five). It is important for parents
not to take sides but rather to insist that the children work
out disagreements themselves, calling for a temporary
“time out” for feelings to cool down, if necessary. Any
form of parental involvement in squabbling by siblings
can create a triangle that perpetuates hostilities. Over-insistence that siblings share can also be harmful: to retain
a sense of individuality, children need some boundaries
from their siblings in terms of possessions, territory, and
activities. Furthermore, it is especially difficult for very
young children to share their possessions.
Parents should take time to praise cooperation and
sharing between siblings as a means of positive reinforcement. The fact that siblings quarrel with each other does
not necessarily mean that they will be inconsiderate, hostile, or aggressive in their dealings with others outside the
family. The security of family often makes children feel
free to express feelings and impulses they are unable to
in other settings.

equal the number of second- and third-borns combined.
Separate studies have found high academic achievement
levels among first-borns in both urban ghettoes in the
United States and at British universities. First-born children are generally responsible, assertive, and task-oriented, often rising to leadership positions as adults. They
are more frequently mentioned in Who’s Who publications than individuals in any other birth position and are
overrepresented among members of Congress and U.S.
presidents. Studies have also found that first-born students are especially vulnerable to stress and tend to seek
the approval of others. Adler found that there were more
first-borns than later-borns among problem children.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The last-born child, never dethroned as the “baby” of
the family, often exhibit a strong sense of security and noncompetitiveness. As a group, last-borns are most successful
socially and have the highest self-esteem levels of all the
birth positions. One study found last-borns more likely than
first-borns or only children to join a fraternity or sorority.
Like youngest children, only children are never displaced as
the youngest in the family. With only adult models to emulate within the family, only children are achievement-oriented and most likely to attain academic success and attend
college. However, studies show that only children have the
most problems with close relationships and the lowest need
for affiliation. They are also the most likely to be referred
for help with psychiatric disorders.
Sibling rivalry frequently erupts in households with
two or more children, competing for the time, attention
and affection of parents. The ages of children, and the
years between them, can influence the degree and intensity of of fighting and arguing. First borns may resent responsibility placed upon them for their siblings. Middle
children may feel “squeezed out” while last-borns may
play on their baby position in the family. Mental health
experts advise parents to listen to their children’s feelings rather than deny their feelings or convince them to
feel differently. To lessen the tensions, experts suggest
that parents find time to spend with each child and share
in each child’s interests.
Further Reading
Leman, Kevin. The New Birth Order Book: Why You Are the
Way You Are. Grand Rapids, Mich.: F.H. Revell, 1998.
Toman, Walter. Family Constellation: Its Effects on Personality
and Social Behavior. New York: Springer Pub. Co., 1993
Wallace, Meri. Birth Order Blues: How Parents Can Help
Their Children Meet the Challenges of Birth Order. New
York: H. Holt, 1999.

Birth trauma
In psychoanalysis, birth provides the first experience of anxiety in an individual’s life.

In psychoanalytical theory, birth trauma is the first
major occasion of great anxiety in the life of an individual experienced at birth as the infant moves from the
gentle comfort of the womb into a new environment full
of harsh and unfamiliar stimuli. While most psychoanalytical psychologists assign a moderate degree of importance to the birth trauma in terms of its effects, some believe that the birth trauma is the prototypical basis of all
later anxiety neuroses. The universality of the birth experience presents obvious difficulties in the precise determination of the nature and effects of the birth trauma.
The term birth trauma may also mean any physical injury to an infant that occurs during birth.
Further Reading
Hotchner, Tracy. Pregnancy and Childbirth: The Complete
Guide for a New Life. 2nd ed. New York: Avon, 1990
Martin, Margaret. The Illustrated Book of Pregnancy and
Childbirth. New York: Facts on File, 1991.

Birth
In humans, the process of delivering a child from
the uterus, usually by passage through the birth
canal at the end of pregnancy, normally after a gestation period of about 267 days; also called parturition, or labor.

Childbearing is often viewed as the transition to
adult female sexuality. Birth labor is divided into several
stages. During the latent phase (Stage 0), which lasts
from several hours to as long as three days, uterine contractions (either regular or irregular) are present, but the
cervix has not dilated more than three or four centimeters. The mucus plug may be passed at this stage. The
first stage of labor begins with uterine contractions accompanied by mild pain at intervals of about 10 to 20
minutes and sensations of discomfort in the small of the
back which eventually become stronger and spread to the
entire abdominal area. The cervix, or neck of the uterus,
dilates rapidly from three or four centimeters until its
opening is large enough to allow the passage of the child
(10 centimeters). By the end of the first stage (although
sometimes much earlier), the sac containing the amniotic
fluid which surrounds the child breaks. The first stage
can take up to 12 hours with first-time mothers, although
it may be very rapid in women who have had several
children. It can last many hours in obstructed labor,
where the baby is unusually large or badly angled.
The second stage of labor begins with the complete
dilation and effacement (thinning) of the cervix and ends
when the baby is born. At this stage, the contractions are

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

81

Birth

Second-born and/or middle children tend to feel inferior to the older child or children, since they do not realize
that their lower level of achievement is a function of age.
They often try to succeed in areas not excelled in by their
elder siblings. Middle-born children have shown a relatively high level of success in team sports, and both they and
last-borns have been found to be better adjusted emotionally if from large families. Studies have also found middle
children to be sensitive to injustice and likely to have aesthetic interests. Generally trusting, accepting, and othercentered, they tend to maintain relationships successfully.

Birth
Baby emerging from the womb. (SIU, National Audubon Society Collection/ Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

increasingly frequent and intense, ultimately recurring at
intervals of two to three minutes and lasting about a
minute. The mother begins contracting her abdominal
muscles voluntarily (“bearing down”), and the baby is
expelled, usually head first, by a combination of this voluntary contraction and the involuntary contractions of
the uterine muscles. The physician aids in the delivery
by guiding the infant’s head and shoulders out of the
birth canal. About 2 to 3 percent of babies are born feet
first (breech babies). Obstetrical forceps may be applied
during the second stage of labor to speed delivery in
order to ease either maternal exhaustion or infant distress. Other medical techniques utilized include the episiotomy, a surgical incision along the back of the vagina
to enlarge the opening. (This procedure is now performed less frequently than it was in the past.)
When the baby is born, mucus and blood are removed from the nose and mouth by means of suctioning.
The umbilical cord is clamped and cut, and the child is
given to the mother to hold. The infant’s physical condition is then assessed by the Apgar score, which evaluates the overall level of health based on heart rate, skin
color, muscular activity and respiratory effort, and response to stimuli. During the third stage of labor, which
82

occurs within the first hour after the child is born, placental material, or afterbirth, is expelled through the
birth canal by strong uterine contractions called afterbirth pains. These contractions also help the uterus to return to its normal size. The doctor examines the placenta
and amniotic sac to confirm that all tissue has been expelled from the uterus, as serious complications may result if fragments remain inside, especially hemorrhaging.
If parts of the placenta or sac are missing, the doctor removes them by hand. Finally, the episiotomy (if one has
been performed) is sutured with absorbable stitches. The
total duration of labor averages about 13 hours for first
deliveries and about eight hours for subsequent deliveries, although there are large individual variances from
these figures.
The pain of the birth process can be relieved by
drugs, but many of these drugs also have the effect of
slowing uterine contractions or depressing the respiratory system of the child. Drugs are either not used—or
used with special care—in the case of twins or premature infants. Moderate doses of narcotic analgesics may
be given to the mother, which are metabolized quickly
and nearly absent by the time of delivery. Local anesthetics similar to Novocaine may be administered to provide

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The natural childbirth movement begun by Fernand
Lamaze, which advocates birth without drugs or medical
intervention, departed from the practices of the 1940s
and 1950s, when the administration of drugs and medical procedures such as episiotomies were standard obstetrical procedure. Natural childbirth methods use nonmedical relaxation techniques for pain control and allow
for more active participation in labor by the mother and a
lay coach, usually the husband. They typically include
prenatal classes for the mother and coach. Women who
use the Lamaze method are taught to perform three activities simultaneously during contractions: breathing in
a special pattern, chanting a nonsense or meaningless
phrase coordinated with the rhythm of her breathing, and
staring intently at an object.
The home delivery movement, which became popular in the United States during the 1970s, gave way to the
establishment of birthing centers (in or affiliated with
hospitals) staffed by nurse-midwives and obstetricians in
an attempt to duplicate the family-centered, drug-free
experience of home birth but without the risks posed by
the absence of medical professionals. The natural childbirth movement has also focused on easing the birth experience for the infant. In Birth Without Violence, the
physician Frederick Leboyer described modern hospital
birth as “torture of the innocent” and proposed measures
to make the transition to life outside the womb a more
gentle one for the newborn. These measures include dim
lights and a quiet atmosphere in the delivery room, postponing cutting of the umbilical cord, and bathing the infant in lukewarm water. Psychologists Otto Rank and
R.D. Laing have elaborated on the idea of birth trauma
as a factor in adult mental and emotional problems, and
Leonard Orr developed rebirthing in the 1970s as a
holistic healing technique for eliminating negative beliefs that influence an adult’s behavior and attitudes.
Occasionally, complicating factors that can affect the
mother, the child, or both are encountered in the birth
process. These factors include, for example, poor health,
anatomical abnormalities, prematurity, and unusual orientation of the child in the uterus, such as breech presentation, in which the child moves through the birth canal
head last, and (rarely) transverse presentation, in which
the child is positioned sideways. In some women, the
pelvic space is too small for spontaneous birth of a baby,
and the delivery of the child is accomplished through a
surgical opening made in the mother’s abdominal wall and
uterus, in a procedure called a cesarean section. For a
healthy mother and child, the risks of childbirth are ex-

tremely low. Premature labor, which occurs in about one
pregnancy out of 20, is the primary danger to mother and
child during the last trimester of pregnancy and the major
cause of newborn death. About 40 to 50 percent of mothers—especially first-time mothers—experience mild postpartum depression, thought to be caused by a combination of biochemical factors and adjustment to the pressures and demands of parenthood. A smaller percentage—
between 5 and 10 percent—become severely depressed.
Postpartum depression usually lasts up to 90 days.
Abnormalities present at the time of birth, known as
birth defects or congenital defects, occur in one of every
14 babies born in the United States. More than 3,000
birth defects have been identified, ranging from minor
dark sports or a birthmarks to serious disfigurements or
limited lifespans. Congenital heart defects occur to one of
every 125 to 150 infants born in the U.S., making heart
defects among the most common birth defects and the
leading cause of birth defect-related deaths. Down syndrome is the most frequently occurring chromosomal abnormality, occurring to one of every 800 to 1,000 infants
born in the United States. Annually, care of children with
birth defects in the U.S. costs billions of dollars.
Birth defects have two causes: heredity and environment. Environment includes maternal illness, such as
German measles. Other environmental factors include: alcohol and drugs, consumed during the pregnancy, and exposure to certain medicines or chemicals. Heavy alcohol
consumption during pregnancy can trigger fetal alcohol
syndrome in newborns, characterized by underweight,
small eyes, a short upturned nose with a broad bridge,
and often a degree of mental retardation. Thalidomide,
prescribed in the 1950s as a mild sedative, led to the birth
of 7,000 severely deformed babies, suffering from a condition called phocomelia, characterized by extremely
short limbs that were often without fingers or toes.
For some diseases, like spina bifida, the causes are
unknown but believed to be a combination of heredity
and environment. Spina bifida, a neural tube defect, is
the most frequently occurring permanently disabling
birth defect in the United States, affecting one out of
every 1,000 newborns. In spina bifida, the spine fails to
close properly during the first month of pregnancy. In
worst cases, the spinal cord protrudes through the back.
A large percentage of children born with spina bifida
have hydrocephalus, an accumulation of fluid in the
brain which requires a surgical procedures called
“shunting” to relieve the fluid build up and redirect it
into the abdominal area. Sophisticated medical techniques allow most children with spina bifida to live well
into adulthood. Based on research, the U.S. Public
Health Service recommends that women of childbearing
age in the U.S. consume 0.4 mg of folic acid daily to re-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

83

Birth

pain relief in the cervical and vaginal areas, offering
more localized relief with fewer side effects than narcotics. Methods of childbirth have been developed in
which the use of drugs is kept to a minimum.

Bisexuality

duce the risk of having a pregnancy with spinal bifida or
the other two neural two defects: anencephaly or encephalocele. Amniocentesis or ultrasound testing can diagnose spina bifida before birth.
Sickle-cell anemia, Tay-Sachs, color blindness,
deafness, and extra digits on the hand or feet are hereditary birth defects passed on through generations by abnormal genes. Birth defects may not impact each generation, but the abnormal gene is passed on.
Further Reading

Martin S. Weinberg, Colin J. Williams, and Douglas
W. Pryor, in their book Dual Attraction: Understanding
Bisexuality, have developed a simplified version of
Klein’s grid, exploring only three, rather than seven,
variables: sexual feelings, sexual activities, and romantic
feelings. Sexual feelings include attraction, fantasies,
arousal, etc. Sexual activities are actual behaviors such
as kissing, fellatio, and intercourse. Romantic feelings
are the experience of “falling in love.” Self-identified bisexuals can be more or less hetero- or homosexual in
each of these categories.

Hotchner, Tracy. Pregnancy and Childbirth: The Complete
Guide for a New Life. 2nd ed. New York: Avon, 1990.
Martin, Margaret. The Illustrated Book of Pregnancy and
Childbirth. New York: Facts on File, 1991.
Nathaniels, Peter. Life Before Birth and a Time to Be Born.
Ithaca, NY: Promethean Press, 1992.

See also Fetal alcohol effect and syndrome

Bisexuality
Sexual orientation defined as sexual involvement
with members of both sexes concurrently (within
the period of one year) or any sexual attraction to
or involvement with members of both sexes at any
time in one’s life.

There is no single accepted definition of bisexuality.
Some define it narrowly as sexual involvement with members of both sexes concurrently (within a twelve-month
period or less). Others define bisexuality more broadly as
any sexual attraction to or involvement with members of
both sexes at any time in one’s life. However, few people
qualify as bisexual in its narrow definition. A comprehensive study, “Sex in America,” conducted in 1992 by the
University of Chicago, found that less than 1% of either
males (0.7%) or females (0.3%) had engaged in sexual activity with both males and females within the previous
year. While no statistics exist on the numbers of Americans who fit the broad definition of bisexuality, estimates
range from the millions to tens of millions.
Sigmund Freud believed that bisexuality was a
“disposition” common to all humans. He contended that
every individual has a masculine and feminine side, and
that each side is heterosexually attracted to members of
the opposite sex. Most people, however, according to
Freud, repress one side, becoming either hetero- or homosexual. Alfred Kinsey posited a scale for human sexuality ranging from zero, representing exclusive heterosexual behavior, to six, representing exclusive homosexual behavior. Between the two poles is a spectrum of bisexual activity.
84

Dr. Fritz Klein, a noted psychiatrist, has expanded
on Kinsey’s work, creating the Klein Sexual Orientation
Grid, which takes into account seven different variables
and the passage of time in defining one’s sexual orientation. Klein’s variables provide a more detailed look at
one’s sexuality, examining preferences in attraction, behavior, fantasies, emotional involvement, social involvement, lifestyle, and self-identification. Klein also allows
for sexual development over time, an important element
missing from Kinsey’s work.

Some studies of fraternal and identical twins show
that identical twins are more likely to be bisexual than are
fraternal twins, suggesting a genetic basis for bisexual
predisposition. These studies have yet to be tested adequately to be considered conclusive, however. The fact is
that without a single accepted definition of bisexuality, no
single conclusion can be reached concerning its origins.
Debate over why people are hetero-, homo-, or bisexual is a fairly recent phenomenon. Identification by
sexual preference only began in the 19th century, and before then, it was rarely discussed. Today, however, there
is tremendous pressure for a person to declare a sexual
preference. The idea of bisexuality is threatening to
some people because sexuality is no longer clearly defined between homosexuality and heterosexuality.
Bisexuals are often accused of being “homosexuals
in disguise.” As a result, they often feel confused about
their sexuality. They are considered “too gay” to be
straight, and “too straight” to be gay. Few resources exist
to help bisexuals understand themselves. Homosexual
support groups may reject them if they reveal their heterosexual sides; heterosexuals may reject them if they reveal their homosexual feelings. Many bisexuals remain
in the closet, hiding their gender-encompassing feelings
from others, and sometimes even from themselves. Others lead dual lives, expressing their homosexual sides
with one group of friends, while reserving their heterosexual selves for a totally separate social circle.
Life, and love, can become quite complicated for a
bisexual person. The pressures can be tremendous, creating a great deal of stress and pain. A 1989 U.S. Depart-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Unfortunately, concern over the spread of AIDS has
caused another backlash against bisexuality, based on the
assumption that all bisexuals are promiscuous. Most bisexuals are monogamous for all or part of their lives, and
those who engage in promiscuous behavior are not necessarily at greater risk of contracting AIDS. It has been suggested that of women who contract AIDS through sexual
intercourse, only 10-20% were infected by bisexual males.
Dianne K. Daeg de Mott
Further Reading
Bass, Ellen, and Kate Kaufman. Free Your Mind: The Book for
Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Youth—and Their Allies. New
York: HarperPerennial, 1996.
D’Augelli, Anthony R., and Charlotte J. Patterson. Lesbian, Gay,
and Bisexual Identities Over the Lifespan: Psychological
Perspectives. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Ehrenreich, Barbara. “The Gap Between Gay and Straight.”
Time 141, no. 19, May 10, 1993, p. 76.
Garber, Marjorie. Vice Versa: Bisexuality and the Eroticism of
Everyday Life. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1995.
Gelman, David. “Tune In, Come Out.” Newsweek 122, no. 19,
November 8, 1993, pp. 70-71.
Hutchins, Loraine, and Lani Kaahumanu, eds. Bi Any Other
Name: Bisexual People Speak Out. Boston: Alyson Publications, 1991.
Klein, Fritz, M.D. The Bisexual Option, 2nd ed. New York:
The Haworth Press, 1993.
Leland, John. “Bisexuality.” Newsweek 126, no. 3, July 17,
1995, pp. 44-50.
Rose, Sharon, et al. Bisexual Horizons: Politics, Histories,
Lives. London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1996.
Weinberg, Martin S., Colin J. Williams, and Douglas W. Pryor.
Dual Attraction: Understanding Bisexuality. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1994.

Body image
The subjective conception of one’s own body,
based largely on evaluative judgments about how
one is perceived by others.

Humans have the unique ability to form abstract
conceptions about themselves and to gaze at themselves

as both the seer and the object seen. Conflict occurs
when the seer places unrealistic demands on him or herself and the body. Body image considers physical appearance and may include body functions or other features. Body image is linked to internal sensations, emotional experiences, fantasies, feedback from others, and
plays a key role in a person’s self-concept. Self-perceptions of physical inferiority can strongly affect all areas
of one’s life and may lead to avoidance of social or sexual activities or result in eating disorders.
How one’s physical characteristics correspond to
cultural standards plays a crucial role in the formation of
body image. In the South Pacific island of Tonga, for example, corpulence is considered a sign of wealth and elevated social status, but would be termed obesity in Western societies, particularly in the United States where the
slim and firm athletic form is idealized. Deference to
cultural standards and concepts can be very damaging, as
few people attain an “ideal body,” no matter how it is defined, and those who depart drastically from the ideal
can suffer a sharply reduced sense of self-worth.
Psychologists are interested in body image primarily
to determine whether the image held reasonably agrees
with reality. A seriously distorted or inappropriate body
image characterizes a number of mental disorders. For
anorexia nervosa, a seriously distorted body image is a
classic symptom and major diagnostic criterion. The
anorexic, most likely an adolescent female, perceives
herself as “fat” even when she is emaciated. A distorted
sense of body image may comprise a disorder in itself,
known as body dysmorphic disorder. People affected by
this condition generally become preoccupied with a specific body part or physical feature and exhibit signs of
anxiety or depression. Commonly, the victim mentally
magnifies a slight flaw into a major defect, sometimes
erroneously believing it the sign of a serious disease,
such as cancer, and may resort to plastic surgery to relieve distress due to the person’s perceived appearance.
A healthy body image, according to some in the
mental health field, is one that does not diverge too
widely from prevailing cultural standards but leaves
room for a person’s individuality and uniqueness.
Humans start to recognize themselves in mirrors in
meaningful ways at about 18 months and begin perceiving themselves as physical beings in toddlerhood. By
school-age, children often face prejudices based on their
appearances. Children spend much of their early lives in
schools, an environment that is highly social and competitive with notoriously rigid hierarchies often based on
physical appearances. Studies have found that teachers
are also drawn to the most attractive children, which can
further compound a child’s poor body image. In a

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

85

Body image

ment of Health and Human Services report determined
that 30% of teenage suicides occur among gay and lesbian youths, but the number of bisexual victims is unknown. Fortunately, however, a movement has begun in
recent years to promote a greater acceptance and understanding of bisexuality. More studies are being done
specifically on bisexuality or that include bisexuality as a
distinct category.

Bonding

Bonding
The process by which parents form a close personal relationship with their newborn child.

Bonding is the process by which parents form a
close personal relationship with their newborn child. The
term “bonding” is often used interchangeably with “ attachment,” a related phenomenon. For the purposes of
this essay, bonding is confined to the newborn period.
Attachment develops over the larger period of infancy
and is treated in a separate entry.
The way parents feel about a new child is highly
subjective and emotional, and can be very difficult to
measure. Some researchers in the United States and elsewhere have attempted to show that there is a “sensitive
period” soon after birth, in which the newborn is quietly
alert and interested in engaging the mother, and the
mother is able to attune to the new child. It is assumed,
but not proven, that if mothers are given the opportunity
to interact with their infants at this time, they are most
likely to become bonded to the child—to begin to respond to him, love him, and take care of him. Fathers
who are with their partners at the birth also respond to
the infant in characteristic ways immediately after birth.

Constant exposure to very thin models in the media can
lead to unrealistic body images. (Photo by David Karp.
AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with permission.)

school-age child, a poor body image may result in social
withdrawal and poor self-esteem.
As puberty nears, children become increasingly focused on the appearance of their bodies. An adolescent
may mature too quickly, too slowly, in a way that is unattractive, or in a way that makes the adolescent stand out in
the crowd. Any deviation from the ideal can result in a negative body image, and adolescents may diet or use steroids
to counter a negative self-concept. As people age, most revise their views of the ideal body so that they can continue
to feel reasonably attractive at each stage of their lives.
See also Anorexia; Bulimia
Further Reading
Cash, Thomas F. What Do You See When You Look in the Mirror?: Helping Yourself to a Positive Body Image. New
York: Bantam Books, 1995.
Costin, Carolyn. Your Dieting Daughter: Is She Dying for Attention? New York: Brunner/Mazel, 1997.
86

American pediatricians John Kennell and Marshall
Klaus pioneered scientific research on bonding in the
1970s. Working with infants in a neonatal intensive care
unit, they often observed that infants were often taken
away from their mothers immediately after birth for emergency medical procedures. These babies often remained in
the nursery for several weeks before being allowed to go
home with their families. Although the babies did well in
the hospital, a troubling percentage of them seemed not to
prosper at home, and were even victims of battering and
abuse. Kennell and Klaus also noted that the mothers of
these babies were often uncomfortable with them, and did
not seem to believe that their babies had survived birth.
Even mothers who had successfully raised previous infants seemed to have special difficulties with their children that had been treated in the intensive care nursery.
Kennell and Klaus surmised that the separation immediately after birth interrupted some fundamental process between the mother and the new baby. They experimented
with giving mothers of both premature and healthy fullterm babies extra contact with their infants immediately
after birth and in the few days following birth. Mothers
who were allowed more access to their babies in the hospital seemed to develop better rapport with their infants, to
hold them more comfortably, smile and talk to them more.
Studies conducted in the 1970s making these claims
have come under attack in the 1980s and 1990s. Much of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Bonding

Research shows that instinctive behaviors in new mothers facilitate bonding with their infants. (Goujon/Jerrican. Photo
Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

the earlier research has been difficult to duplicate, and
many mitigating factors in parent-child relationships
make the lasting effects of early bonding experience difficult to pin down with scientific rigor. Nevertheless,
bonding research brought about widespread changes in
hospital obstetrical practice in the United States. Fathers
and family members were allowed to remain with the
mother during labor and delivery in many cases. Mothers
were allowed to hold their infants immediately after
birth, and in many cases babies remained with their
mothers throughout their hospital stay. Bonding research
has also led to increased awareness of the natural capabilities of the infant at birth, and so has encouraged
many others to deliver their babies without anesthesia
(which depresses mother and infant responsiveness).
One important factor in the parents’ ability to bond
with the infant after birth is that the healthy, undrugged
newborn is often in what is called a “quiet alert” state for
45 to 60 minutes after birth. Research has demonstrated
that immediately after birth the newborn can see and has
visual preferences, can hear and will turn his head toward a spoken voice, and will move in rhythm to his
mother’s voice. Mothers and fathers allowed to interact

with their newborns in this time frame often exhibit
characteristic behaviors, such as stroking the baby, first
with fingertips, then with the palm, looking in the baby’s
eyes, and speaking to the baby in a high-pitched voice.
Researchers have also found physical changes in the
mother right after birth, such as hormonal increases triggered by the infant licking or sucking her nipples, and
increased blood flow to her breasts when hearing the infant cry. Some scientists speculate that there are instinctual behaviors triggered in the mother in response to the
infant immediately after birth that facilitate her bonding
with the infant, and thus promote the infant’s survival.
Research on the bonding process has been scrutinized. Detractors call attention to the often poor research
design of early studies and reject bonding as a scientific
fallacy thrust on women to make them feel that they
must react to their infants in certain prescribed fashions.
Some people have misinterpreted bonding to mean that
if the early sensitive period is missed, they cannot become successful parents. Obviously, parents can form
close attachments to infants they did not see at birth, either because of medical emergencies or because their
children are adopted. Thus, early experience with the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

87

Borderline personality

newborn is only one factor in the complex relations of
parents to children.
Despite some problems with quantifying bonding as
a scientific phenomenon, there is a wealth of anecdotal
evidence on the positive effects of an after-birth bonding
experience. Most hospitals are now much more sensitive
to parents’ desire to be with their newborn than in the
past. Parents-to-be may wish to find out their hospital’s
policies regarding the period immediately after birth.
Questions to ask may include: Will the mother be allowed to hold the baby immediately if there is no problem? If tests are needed, can they be delayed until after
the first hour? What family members can be present at
the birth? Can family members be present at a cesarean
birth? Will the baby stay in the same room with the
mother or be sent to a central nursery? Some hospitals
reportedly score mothers on how well they seem to bond
with their infants, allegedly to flag potential future child
abuse. This in effect makes early and rapid bonding a
test, with failure potentially criminal, and egregiously violates the spirit of the hospital reform that bonding research brought about. If a hospital admits to “testing” for
bonding, parents may ask if they may decline the test, or
if they can have access to the test results. Ideally, both
the birth and the period immediately after should be handled according to the parents’ wishes.
A. Woodward
Further Reading
Eyer, Diane E. Mother-Infant Bonding: A Scientific Fiction.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1992.
Gaskin, Ina May. Babies, Breastfeeding and Bonding. South
Hadley, MA: Bergin & Garvey, 1987.
Klaus, Marshall H., John H. Kennell, and Phyllis H. Klaus.
Bonding: Building the Foundations of Secure Attachment
and Independence. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995.

Borderline personality
Mental illness characterized by erratic and impulsive self-destructive behavior and an intense fear of
abandonment.

Characteristics
Borderline individuals have a history of unstable interpersonal relationships. They have difficulty seeing the
“shades of gray” in the world, and view significant people in their lives as either completely flawless or extremely unfair and uncaring (a phenomena known as
splitting). These alternating feelings of idealization and
88

devaluation are the hallmark feature of borderline personality disorder. Because borderline patients set up such
excessive and unrealistic expectations for others, they
are bound to be disappointed when their expectations
aren’t realized.
The term “borderline” was originally coined by psychologist Adolf Stern in the 1930s to describe patients
who bordered somewhere between psychosis and neurosis. It has also been used to describe the borderline
states of consciousness these patients sometimes feel
when they experience dissociative symptoms (a feeling
of disconnection from oneself).

Causes and symptoms
Borderline personality disorder accounts for
30–60% of all personality disorders, and is present in
approximately 2% of the general population. The disorder appears to affect women more frequently than men,
and 75% of all diagnosed patients are female.
Adults with borderline personalities often have a
history of significant traumas such as emotional and
physical abuse, neglect, or the loss of a parent in childhood. Feelings of inadequacy and self-loathing that arise
from these situations may be key in developing the borderline personality. It has also been theorized that these
patients are trying to compensate for the care they were
denied in childhood through the idealized demands they
now make on themselves and on others as an adult.
In its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV), a reference standard for mental health professionals, the American
Psychiatric Association defines borderline personality
as a long-standing pattern of instability and impulsive
behavior beginning in early adulthood. DSM-IV states
that at least five of the following criteria (or symptoms)
must be present in an individual for a diagnosis of borderline disorder:
• Frantic efforts to avoid real or perceived abandonment.
• A pattern of unstable, and intense interpersonal relationships, characterized by alternating between idealization
and devaluation (i.e., a “love-hate” relationship).
• Identity disturbance characterized by an extreme, persistently unstable self-image and sense of self.
• Impulsive behavior in at least two areas (e.g., spending,
sex, substance abuse, reckless driving, binge eating).
• Recurrent suicidal behavior, gestures, or threats, or recurring acts of self-mutilation (e.g., cutting or burning
oneself).
• Affective (mood) instability due to brief but intense
episodes of dysphoria (depression), irritability, or anxiety.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Diagnosis
Borderline personality disorder typically first appears
in early adulthood. Although the disorder may occur in
adolescence, it may be difficult to diagnose, as “borderline symptoms” such as impulsive and experimental behaviors, insecurity, and mood swings are also common,
developmentally appropriate occurrences at this age.
Borderline symptoms may also be the result of
chronic substance abuse and biologically based medical
conditions (specifically, disorders of the central nervous
system). These should be ruled out as causes before
making the diagnosis of borderline personality disorder.
The disorder commonly occurs together with mood
disorders (i.e., depression and anxiety), post-traumatic
stress disorder, eating disorders, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), and other personality
disorders. It has also been suggested by some researchers that borderline personality disorder is not a
true pathological condition in and of itself, but rather a
number of overlapping personality disorders; however, it
is commonly recognized as a separate and distinct disorder by the American Psychological Association and by
most mental health professionals.

However, their fear of abandonment, and of ending the
therapy relationship, may actually cause them to discontinue treatment as soon as progress is made.
Psychotherapy, typically in the form of cognitive behavioral therapy, is usually the treatment of choice for borderline personalities. Dialectical behavior therapy
(DBT), a cognitive-behavioral technique, has emerged as
an effective therapy for borderline personalities with suicidal tendencies. The treatment focuses on giving the borderline patient self-confidence and coping tools for life
outside of treatment through a combination of social skill
training, mood awareness and meditative exercises, and
education on the disorder. Group therapy is also an option for some borderline patients, although some may feel
threatened by the idea of “sharing” a therapist with others.
Medication is not considered a front-line treatment
choice, but may be useful in treating some symptoms of
the disorder, and in alleviating the symptoms of mood
disorders that have been diagnosed in conjunction with
borderline personality disorder. Recent clinical studies
have indicated that naltrexone, an opiate antagonist, may
be helpful in relieving physical discomfort related to dissociative episodes.

Prognosis
The disorder usually peaks in young adulthood and
frequently stabilizes after age 30. Approximately 7580% of borderline patients attempt or threaten suicide,
and between 8-10% are successful. If the borderline patient suffers from depressive disorder, the risk of suicide
is much higher. For this reason, swift diagnosis and appropriate interventions are critical.
See also Dissociation/Dissociative disorders

Treatment
Individuals with borderline personality disorder
seek psychiatric help and hospitalization at a much higher rate than people with other personality disorders,
probably due to their fear of abandonment and need to
seek out idealized interpersonal relationship. These patients represent the highest percentage of diagnosed personality disorders (up to 60%).
Providing effective therapy for the borderline personality patient is a necessary, but difficult, challenge.
The therapist-patient relationship is subject to the same
inappropriate and unrealistic demands that borderline
personalities place on all their significant interpersonal
relationships. They are chronic “treatment seekers” who
become easily frustrated with their therapist if they feel
they are not receiving adequate attention or empathy,
and symptomatic anger, impulsivity, and self-destructive
behavior can impede the therapist-patient relationship.

Paula Ford-Martin
Further Reading
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th ed. Washington, D.C.:
American Psychiatric Press, Inc., 1994.
Moskovitz, Richard A. Lost in the Mirror: An Inside Look at
Borderline Personality Disorder. Dallas, TX: Taylor Publishing, 1996.

Further Information
BPD Central. http://www.bpdcentral.com.
National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI). 200 North
Glebe Road, Suite 1015, Arlington, VA, USA. 222033754, (800)950-6264. http://www.nami.org.
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). 6001 Executive
Boulevard, Rm. 8184, MSC 9663, Bethesda, MD, USA.
20892-9663, fax: (301)443-4279, (301)443-4513. Email:
nimhinfo@nih.gov. http://www.nimh.nih.gov.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

89

Borderline personality

• Chronic feelings of emptiness.
• Inappropriate and intense anger, or difficulty controlling anger displayed through temper outbursts, physical
fights, and/or sarcasm.
• Transient, stress-related paranoia and/or severe dissociative symptoms (a separation from the subconscious,
sometimes characterized by a “dream-like” state and
physical symptoms such as flashbacks).

Boredom

Boredom
A state of weariness with, and disinterest in, life.

Everyone, at one time or another, feels bored. Children, however, may report boredom more frequently because they have not yet learned to alleviate it for themselves. Infants and toddlers rarely experience boredom.
Infants spend large blocks of time asleep and much of
their waking time feeding. Toddlers have a nearly unlimited curiosity to explore a world that is still new to them.
Preschool and school-aged children, though, are fickle in
their attentions. The child may be engrossed in an activity one minute and, seconds later, lose interest and complain of boredom.
Adults who complain of boredom may be expressing their frustration at being unchallenged by their present activities. People who complain about being bored
at work, for example, may feel that they are not being
used to their potential. Boredom in adults is often a sign
of a lack of intellectual stimulation. In rare instances,
people who repeatedly complain of boredom might be
suffering from a clinical condition such as depression.
Depressed people may withdraw from formerly interesting activities and complain of boredom. Such a person
may need to talk to a psychologist about the factors that
are causing the depression.
Further Reading

years of the twentieth century. was one of the leading
cities for psychological research. Trained as a physician,
Boss received his medical degree from the University of
Zurich in 1928. Before that, however, he had spent time
in Vienna, where he had met (and been analyzed by) Sigmund Freud.
It was Boss’s exposure to the writings of Ludwig
Binswanger and Heidigger that prompted him to formulate a psychological model. Binswanger (1881-1966) has
been called the first existential psychologist. In 1946,
Boss met Heidigger, and it was then that he was able to
fully grasp the concepts that led to his later work.
Essentially, Boss believed that Dasein was a means
of opening the mind—of bringing light to a situation.
The symbolism of light played an important role in
Boss’s work: the idea of “coming out of the darkness,” of
“illuminating an idea,” and ultimately, of “enlightenment.” Boss further believed that mood played an important part in how people reacted to their environment. An
angry person, for example, would be attuned primarily to
things that create feelings of anger. Boss also felt that
dreams were important—more so than other existential
thinkers. What made his interpretation of dreams different from those of Freud or Jung, however, was that he
believed that dreams created their own message rather
than displaying symbols of deeper feelings.
Boss’s books include Existential Foundations of
Medicine and Psychology, Psychoanalysis and Daseinanalysis, and The Analysis of Dreams. He died in 1990.

Wester-Anderson, Joan. “Overcoming Life’s Little Doldrums,”
Current Health 19, (February 1993): 4+.

George A. Milite

Medard Boss
1903-1990
Swiss psychotherapist who helped build the concept of existential psychology.

The idea of combining psychology and philosophy
may seem to run counter to the idea of psychology as a
science. But psychology is a science of the mind, and the
releationship between the mind and ideas is critically important to psychological study. Medard Boss, trained as a
physician, used his knowledge of philosophy to help humanize psychology. He spent his career developing the
concept he called Daseinanalysis. “Dasein” is a German
word meaning “being there,” and it forms a critical element of the philosophy of Martin Heidigger (who became a friend of Boss).
Boss was born in St. Gallen, Switzerland on October 4, 1903 and raised in Zurich. Zurich during the early
90

Murray Bowen
1913-1990
American psychiatrist who pioneered family therapy.

Murray Bowen grew up in a small town that he believed gave him the foundation for his theories on family
therapy. To Bowen, the family was an emotional unit;
although it was made up of individuals who had their
own thoughts and needs, much of how they behaved was
the result of how they functioned as part of the family.
Bowen, the oldest of five children, was born in Waverly, Tennessee, on January 31, 1913. His parents were
Jesse and Maggie Bowen; their families had lived in
Tennessee since the days of the American Revolution.
Jesse Bowen was mayor of Waverly, and he also ran several small businesses there, including the funeral parlor.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Bowen moved to the National Institute of Mental
Health in 1954, and then to Georgetown University Medical Center in 1959, where he remained for the rest of his
career. In the late 1950s he further developed what he
called his “Family Systems Theory.” Bowen believed
that family members would adopt certain types of behavior based on their place in the family; with this knowledge, a therapist could grapple with behavioral issues
more effectively and accurately.
In his later years, Bowen remained active in family
therapy. He published his book, Family Therapy in Clinical Practice, in 1978, and he was a founder and first
president of the American Family Therapy Association
from 1978 to 1982. He died of lung cancer at his home
in Chevy Chase, Maryland, on October 9, 1990.
George A. Milite

John Bowlby
1907-1990
British psychiatrist who discovered insights into the
mother-child bond.

John Bowlby’s pioneering work on the relationship
between mothers and children was instrumental in shaping child psychology in the twentieth century. His re-

search focusing on the mother-child bond—what it
meant, and what happened when it did not or could not
exist—formed the basis for groundbreaking work that
culminated in his “attachment theory” about maternal
bonding. More important, he made practical as well as
theoretical use of his research, working directly with patients and taking young and talented researchers under
his wing.
Born in London on February 26, 1907, Edward John
Mostyn Bowlby was the son of Major Sir Anthony Bowlby and the former May Mostyn. Sir Anthony was a physician who served as surgeon to King George V. When John,
one of six children, was born, his father was 52 and his
mother was 40. His childhood was typical of many middle- and upper-class children in Britain; early years spent
with a nanny or governess, then boarding school. Bowlby
did not feel that his own upbringing was out of the ordinary, although one could conclude that his own reserved
demeanor may have been formed at an early age.
Bowlby attended the Royal Naval College and Cambridge, where he prepared for medical school. He volunteered for a year in a hospital for maladjusted children,
an experience that set the stage for his later work. Two
children in particular intrigued Bowlby: an adolescent
loner who had been expelled from school for stealing,
and a nervous seven-year-old who was called Bowlby’s
shadow because he followed him around. These two
children left a lasting impression on the researcher.
Bowlby entered University College Medical School
in London for his medical training. He became interested
in psychiatry, attending the British Psychoanalytic Institute and also training at the prestigious Maudsley Hospital. At the Institute he was supervised by the innovative
child psychoanalyst Melanie Klein. Although Bowlby
did not agree with many of Klein’s theories, her guidance helped him to ground his later research.
After graduating from medical school, Bowlby
stayed on at Maudsley. Initially he worked with adult patients, but his work gradually turned to children. His first
empirical study, in fact, tracked 44 children whose behavior patterns included anxiety and petty crime. He discovered a common thread among these children: they
had been deprived of their mothers at some point during
their childhood.
During the Second World War, Bowlby moved away
from child research and conducted studies on officer selection criteria for the military. This gave him a chance
to gain solid experience with statistics, which aided his
research after the war. In 1946 he joined the staff of the
Tavistock Clinic in London, where he spent the remainder of his career. During his years at Tavistock, Bowlby
was intrigued by the work of Konrad Lorenz, who re-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

91

John Bowlby

Bowen attended the University of Tennessee, graduating with a bachelor’s degree in 1934. He then went to
the University of Tennessee Medical School, where he
received his M.D. in 1937. He completed internships in
New York and in 1941 enlisted in the Army. Before his
military experience he had planned to become a cardiac
surgeon. His observation of soldiers in the midst of war,
however, convinced him that mental illness was a more
pressing and worthwhile goal. Upon leaving the Army in
1946, he accepted a fellowship at the Menninger Foundation in Topeka, Kansas, where he studied psychoanalysis for several years. Eventually he came to believe
that, despite Freud’s success, his methods fell short in
one important regard: recognizing the family as a unit
with its own emotional needs and behaviors. Whereas
Freud focused on the self, Bowen saw the family as a
source of much of the behavior its members expressed.
Each member operated as an individual, but within the
family structure with its own set of rules. In other words,
Bowen’s approach took a more pragmatic look at human
relationships. As one of five siblings, and as a husband
and father of four children, he no doubt observed much
of what he was writing about in his own family structure.

Brain disorders

searched “imprinting” (for example, how young birds
identify the first creature they see upon hatching as their
mother), and his belief that early experience influenced
later behavior grew stronger. From 1950 to 1952, Bowlby served as a consultant for the World Health Organization, in which he worked with orphaned and institutionalized children who had been separated by their mothers.
His report, Maternal Child Care and Child Health
(1951), said that children who were deprived of their
mothers needed a mother figure to substitute; lack of a
mother or a substitute mother figure would adversely affect children later in life.
In the 1960s, Bowlby began working on his most
important work, his “Attachment and Loss” trilogy. The
books included Attachment (1969), Separation (1973),
and Loss (1980). Initially, his theories were attacked by
traditional psychoanalysts (including Anna Freud) who
claimed that he had misinterpreted Freud’s ideas. But as
psychologists and psychiatrists revised Freud’s theories,
they realized that Bowlby’s theories were both innovative and accurate.
Although Bowlby officially retired in 1972, he remained active in research and writing. He continued his
association with Tavistock, but he also spent more time
at his vacation home on the Isle of Skye, off the Scottish
coast, with his family. (He married Ursula Longstaff in
1938 and had four children.) His last book, a biography
of Charles Darwin, was published in 1990, only months
before his death of a stroke on September 2 on Skye.
George A. Milite
Further Reading
Bowlby, John. Attachment and Loss, vols. 1-3. New York,
Basic Books, 1969, 1973, 1980.
Holmes, Jeremy. John Bowlby and Attachment Theory. London, Routledge, 1993.

Brain disorders
Any of the various disorders associated with the
human brain, including stroke, trauma, and tumors.

It has recently been reported that neurology, the
study of the brain, is the fastest growing specialty in the
life sciences. With this growth has come a wealth of new
information about the origins of and treatments for some
of the more prevalent brain disorders. There are many
varieties of brain disorders that affect humans, including
Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, epilepsy,
92

and other disorders that are more generally thought of as
being “behavioral” rather than biological. These types of
disorders that could be termed disorders of the brain in a
broad sense include depression, schizophrenia, and
bipolar disorder. Beyond these, however, are several
other types of disorders of the brain, including stroke,
trauma, brain tumors, and developmental disorders such
as muscular dystrophy and cerebral palsy.
Strokes are the third leading cause of death in the
United States and are one of the leading causes of disability among older adults. According to the most recent
statistics, a staggering 1,200 people suffer from strokes
each day in this country. “Stroke” is technically a lay
term; when physicians speak of strokes, they are referring to thromboses, hemorrhages, or embolisms. Basically, the term stroke refers to the loss of blood to a part of
the brain and the resulting tissue damage. Because of the
variables involved, strokes are often not correctly diagnosed. Often, especially with very mild events, a patient
will attribute odd sensations to something else. The effects of a stroke may vary, based on its origins and the
area of the brain that was deprived of blood. Generally
speaking, if tissue damage occurred in the right brain
hemisphere, the victim may experience some degree of
paralysis on the left side of the body, a distortion of vision, especially the ability to perceive depth and distance, and a loss of memory. If the tissue affected is on
the left side of the brain, patients may experience some
degree of paralysis on the right side of the body, minor
memory loss, and some degree of language loss.
Other common brain disorders include the array of
conditions caused by head trauma. Injuries to the head
can, obviously, vary tremendously, but such injuries all
result in biochemical abnormalities in the brain. After
the head has been injured in some way, a tremendous
amount of chemicals travel through the brain, which
often have detrimental effects on brain cells, including
paralysis and behavioral and cognitive losses. Recent
medical advances have uncovered some drugs and treatments that can offset this after-effect of trauma, and
physicians now know that brain cells can be replaced in
adults, a procedure that was thought impossible only a
decade ago. Doctors now have the ability to procure accurate images of the brain from magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) machines, allowing them to pinpoint
damaged areas for treatment.
The incidence of brain tumors has increased in recent years, although it is not certain if this trend is simply a result of better diagnostic technology, such as
MRIs. Nonetheless, treatments devised thus far have
generally been less than stellar. Researchers have found
that certain genes inside tumors are capable of creating
resistance to drugs being used to destroy the tumor.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Developmental neurologic disorders of the brain include well-known brain diseases such as Alzheimer’s,
Parkinson’s, muscular dystrophy, and cerebral palsy.
Most of these disorders are now known to be inheritable,
passed from one generation to another genetically. Recent research has isolated the gene that causes strains of
Alzheimer’s, Huntington’s disease, and several other
muscular disorders. Cerebral palsy, a devastating developmental neurologic disorder involving severe muscle
and coordination deterioration, has been attributed to
stroke in newborn infants.
In 1995, the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
spent the following studying brain disorders:
Alzheimer’s disease, $305 million; stroke, $116 million;
multiple sclerosis, $80 million; Parkinson’s disease, $72
million; epilepsy, $55 million; and head injury, $51 million. As a way of comparison, NIH spent $199 million
studying arthritis in 1995.
Further Reading
“Cognitive Impairment to Dementia.” The Lancet (25 February
1995): 465.
“Combating Disorders of the Brain.” New York Times (30 August 1994).
Connaughton, P. Noel. “Decade of the Brain: A Midpoint Status Report.” Patient Care (15 July 1995).
Guiness, Alma E., ed. The Reader’s Digest ABCs of the Human
Mind. Pleasantville, NY: Reader’s Digest Association,
1990.
Mattson, Sarah N. “MRI and Prenatal Alcohol Exposure: Images Provide Insight into FAS.” Alcohol Health and Research World (Winter 1994): 49.

red arteries and bluish veins on the surface of the brain
penetrate inward. Glucose, oxygen, and certain ions pass
easily from the blood into the brain, whereas other substances, such as antibiotics, do not. The four principal
sections of the human brain are the brain stem, the diencephalon, the cerebrum, and the cerebellum.

The brain stem
The brain stem connects the brain with the spinal
cord. All the messages that are transmitted between the
brain and spinal cord pass through the medulla—a part
of the brain stem—via fibers. The fibers on the right side
of the medulla cross to the left and those on the left cross
to the right. As a result, each side of the brain controls
the opposite side of the body. The medulla also controls
the heartbeat, the rate of breathing, and the diameter of
the blood vessels and helps to coordinate swallowing,
vomiting, hiccupping, coughing, and sneezing. Another
component of the brain stem is the pons (meaning
bridge). It conducts messages between the spinal cord
and the rest of the brain, and between the different parts
of the brain. Conveying impulses between the cerebral
cortex, the pons, and the spinal cord is a section of the
brain stem known as the midbrain, which also contains
visual and audio reflex centers involving the movement
of the eyeballs and head.
Twelve pairs of cranial nerves originate in the underside of the brain, mostly from the brain stem. They leave
the skull through openings and extend as peripheral
nerves to their destinations. Among these cranial nerves
are the olfactory nerves that bring messages about smell
and the optic nerves that conduct visual information.

The diencephalon

Brain
Part of the central nervous system located in the
skull. Controls mental and physical actions of the
organism.

The brain, with the spinal cord and network of
nerves, controls information flow throughout the body,
voluntary actions, such as walking, reading, and talking,
and involuntary reactions, such as breathing and heartbeat. The human brain is a soft, shiny, grayish white,
mushroom-shaped structure. Encased within the skull,
the brain of an average adult weight about 3 lb (1.4 kg).
At birth, the average human infant’s brain weighs 13.7
oz (390 g); by age 15, the brain has nearly reached full
adult size. The brain is protected by the skull and by a
three-layer membrane called the meninges. Many bright

The diencephalon lies above the brain stem and embodies the thalamus and hypothalamus. The thalamus
is an important relay station for sensory information, interpreting sensations of sound, smell, taste, pain, pressure, temperature, and touch; the thalamus also regulates
some emotions and memory. The hypothalamus controls a number of body functions, such as heartbeat rate
and digestion, and helps regulate the endocrine system
and normal body temperature. The hypothalamus interprets hunger and thirst, and it helps regulate sleep,
anger, and aggression.

The cerebrum
The cerebrum constitutes nearly 90% of the brain’s
weight. Specific areas of the cerebrum interpret sensory
impulses. For example, spoken and written language are
transmitted to a part of the cerebrum called Wernicke’s

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

93

Brain

Often, if drug treatment of brain tumors is ineffective,
surgery is required to remove the tumor, which can further damage the brain.

Brain

Lateral nerve
Suprapharyngeal
ganglia (brain)

Hypothalamus
Thalamus

Diencephalon

Corpus callosum

Mouth
Subpharyngeal
ganglion
A. Earthworm brain

Deutocerebrum

Cerebrum

Protocerebrum
Stomatogastric
system

Infundibulum
Pituitary gland
Cerebellum

Ventral
nerve cord

Tritocerebrum

Midbrain
Pons

Thoracic ganglia

Medulla
oblongata

Subesophageal
ganglion

Brain
stem

Spinal cord

B. Insect brain

D. Human brain

Cerebral
hemisphere

Cerebellum
Optic lobe

C. Bird brain

Comparison of the brains of an earthworm, an insect, a bird, and a human. (Hans & Cassidy. Gale Research. Reproduced with
permission.)

area where meaning is extracted. Motor areas of the
cerebrum control muscle movements. Broca’s area translates thoughts into speech, and coordinates the muscles
needed for speaking. Impulses from other motor areas
direct hand muscles for writing and eye muscles for
physical movement necessary for reading. The cerebrum
is divided into two hemispheres—left and right. In general, the left half of the brain controls the right side of
the body, and vice versa. For most right-handed people
(and many left-handed people as well), the left half of
the brain is dominant. By studying patients whose cor94

pus callosum had been destroyed, scientists realized that
differences existed between the left and right sides of the
cerebral cortex. The left side of the brain functions mainly in speech, logic, writing, and arithmetic. The right
side of the brain, on the other hand, is more concerned
with imagination, art, symbols, and spatial relations.
The cerebrum’s outer layer, the cerebral cortex, is
composed of gray matter made up of nerve cell bodies.
The cerebral cortex is about 0.08 in (2 mm) thick and its
surface area is about 5 sq ft (0.5 sq m)—around half the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

A deep fissure separates the cerebrum into a left and
right hemisphere, with the corpus callosum, a large bundle of fibers, connecting the two.

The cerebellum
The cerebellum is located below the cerebrum and
behind the brain stem. It is butterfly-shaped, with the
“wings” known as the cerebellar hemispheres. The cerebellum controls many subconscious activities, such as
balance and muscular coordination. Disorders related to
damage of the cerebellum are ataxia (problems with coordination), dysarthria (unclear speech resulting from
problems controlling the muscles used in speaking), and
nystagmus (uncontrollable jerking of the eyeballs). A
brain tumor that is relatively common in children known
as medullablastoma grows in the cerebellum.

Studying the brain
Researchers have discovered that neurons carry information through the nervous system in the form of
brief electrical impulses called action potentials. When
an impulse reaches the end of an axon, neurotransmitters
are released at junctions called synapses. The neurotransmitters are chemicals that bind to receptors on the
receiving neurons, triggering the continuation of the impulse. Fifty different neurotransmitters have been discovered since the first one was identified in 1920. By
studying the chemical effects of neurotransmitters in the
brain, scientists are developing treatments for mental
disorders and are learning more about how drugs affect
the brain.
Scientists once believed that brain cells do not regenerate, thereby making brain injuries and brain diseases untreatable. Since the late 1990s, researchers have
been testing treatment for such patients with neuron
transplants, introducing nerve tissue into the brain. They
have also been studying substances, such as nerve
growth factor (NGF), that someday could be used to help
regrow nerve tissue.
Technology provides useful tools for researching the
brain and helping patients with brain disorders. An
electroencephalogram (EEG) is a record of brain waves,
electrical activity generated in the brain. An EEG is obtained by positioning electrodes on the head and ampli-

fying the waves with an electroencephalograph and is
valuable in diagnosing brain diseases such as epilepsy
and tumors.
Scientists use three other techniques to study and
understand the brain and diagnose disorders:
(1) Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses a magnetic field to display the living brain at various depths as
if in slices.
(2) Positron emission tomography (PET) results in
color images of the brain displayed on the screen of a
monitor. During this test, a technician injects a small
amount of a substance, such as glucose, that is marked
with a radioactive tag. The marked substance shows
where glucose is consumed in the brain. PET is used to
study the chemistry and activity of the normal brain and
to diagnose abnormalities such as tumors.
(3) Magnetoencephalography (MEG) measures the
electromagnetic fields created between neurons as electrochemical information is passed along. When under the
machine, if the subject is told, “wiggle your toes,” the
readout is an instant picture of the brain at work. Concentric colored rings appear on the computer screen that
pinpoint the brain signals even before the toes are actually wiggled.
Using an MRI along with MEG, physicians and scientists can look into the brain without using surgery.
They foresee that these techniques could help paralysis
victims move by supplying information on how to stimulate their muscles or indicating the signals needed to
control an artificial limb.
Further Reading
Bear, Mark F., Barry W. Connors, and Michael A. Paradiso.
Neuroscience: Exploring the Brain. Baltimore: Williams
& Wilkins, 1996.
Burstein, John. The Mind by Slim Goodbody. Minneapolis,
MN: Fairview Press, 1996.
Carey, Joseph, ed. Brain Facts. Washington, D.C.: Society for
Neuroscience, 1993.
Greenfield, Susan A., ed. The Human Mind Explained: An
Owner’s Guide to the Mysteries of the Mind. New York:
Henry Holt, 1996.
Howard, Pierce J. The Owner’s Manual for the Brain: Everyday Applications from Mind-Brain Research. Austin, TX:
Leornian Press, 1994.
Jackson, Carolyn, ed. How Things Work: The Brain. Alexandria, VA: Time-Life Books, 1990.
The Mind. Alexandria, VA: PBS Video, 1988. (Series of nine 1hour videocassettes.)
The Nature of the Nerve Impulse. Films for the Humanities and
Sciences, 1994-95. (Videocassette.)

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

95

Brain

size of an office desk. White matter, composed of nerve
fibers covered with myelin sheaths, lies beneath the gray
matter. During embryonic development, the gray matter
grows faster than the white matter and folds on itself,
giving the brain its characteristic wrinkly appearance.
The folds are called convolutions or gyri, and the
grooves between them are known as sulci.

Brainwashing

Brainwashing
A systematic, coercive effort to alter an individual’s
beliefs and attitudes, usually by physical and/or
psychological means; also referred to as “thought
control.”

Brainwashing has been used predominantly in reference to severe programs of political indoctrination, although it is used occasionally in connection with certain
religious, especially cultic, practices. Brainwashing
works primarily by making the victim’s existing beliefs
and attitudes nonfunctional and replacing them with new
ones that will be useful in the environment created by the
captor.
Basically, the techniques of brainwashing involve
the complete removal of personal freedom, independence, and decision-making prerogatives; the radical disruption of existing routine behavior; the total isolation
from, and destruction of loyalties to, former friends and
associates; the absolute obedience to authority in all matters; intense physical abuse and threats of injury, death,
and permanent imprisonment; and the constant presentation of the new beliefs as the only correct and acceptable
alternative to continuing an unenlightened life. These
techniques are intended to induce in the victim a state of
childlike trust in, and dependency on, the captor. Confessions of imagined past crimes are often part of the brainwashing process, with the victim admitting to trivial or
absurd shortcomings and errors, and sometimes implicating others falsely. Other captives who have already
been brainwashed may be used to reinforce the process,
criticizing the victim and supporting the captors and
their value system. Once the process begins to take hold,
threats and punishments are replaced by rewards. The
victim is allowed increased physical comfort and given
psychological reinforcement in the form of approval
and friendship. All efforts are directed toward cementing his or her new identity, based on the new set values
and beliefs provided by the captor.
The study of the techniques and effects of brainwashing grew markedly in the 1950s, after a number of
U.S. soldiers appeared to have become indoctrinated
when taken prisoner during the Korean War. They confessed to imagined crimes, including the waging of germ
warfare, and refused to be repatriated when the war
ended. Studies of these prisoners of war and of individuals who had undergone ideological conversion in Chinese prisons during the same period revealed connections between the radical changes in attitude caused by
brainwashing and existing knowledge about attitude and
identity formation and change in ordinary circumstances.
While some brainwashed individuals may actually be re96

leased and allowed to return home, researchers have expressed doubts about whether the process can be completely effective or really last for a prolonged period. Its
short-term and long-term effectiveness in actually altering an individual’s beliefs—both within the brainwashing environment and removed from that environment—
vary from individual to individual, depending on personality characteristics and many other factors. Intense
effort and complete control over the victim are required,
and must be exercised over a period of years. Consequently, many of the brainwashing efforts made during
the Korean War were ineffective, with the prisoners either resisting change or merely becoming confused instead of indoctrinated. In addition, certain attitudes on
the part of prisoners proved particularly resistant to
change. Due to these limitations, many psychologists believe it would be impossible to brainwash large populations, even with the use of mass media.
A classic literary example of brainwashing is found
in George Orwell’s novel, 1984. The protagonist, Winston Smith, is subjected to isolation, humiliation, physical deprivation and violence, and constant threats of further violence. He is also forced to make false confessions which include implicating and denouncing others.
His captors express their intent to “squeeze you empty
and fill you with ourselves.” Their ultimate success in
forcing Smith to adapt to whatever beliefs they choose is
most memorably demonstrated in his final capitulation
to the view that two plus two equals five.
See also Cults
Further Reading
Hyde, Margaret. Brainwashing and Other Forms of Thought
Control. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977.

T. Berry Brazelton
1918Well-known pediatrician, writer, researcher, and
educator.

Like Dr. Benjamin Spock (1903- ) before him, T.
Berry Brazelton has earned a nationwide reputation as a
trusted expert on child care, reaching a mass audience
through books, personal appearances, newspaper
columns, videos, and a cable-TV program. His research
on infant behavior and development led him to formulate
the Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale (NBAS), a
series of clinical tests used in hospitals worldwide.
Brazelton’s efforts on behalf of children have also been
extended to the public policy arena through congressional appearances and lobbying efforts.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Rosalie Wieder

Josef Breuer
1842-1925
Austrian physician, physiologist, and a founder of
psychoanalysis.
Dr. T. Berry Brazelton (Photo by Elise Amendola. AP/Wide
World Photos. Reproduced with permission.)

Thomas Berry Brazelton II was born in Waco, Texas,
in 1918. By the sixth grade he had decided on a career in
pediatrics. He earned his undergraduate degree from
Princeton in 1940 and his M.D. from Columbia in 1943.
He remained there another year as an intern and then
served for a year in the Naval Reserves. His residency
was served at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston,
where he completed an additional residency in child psychiatry at the James Jackson Putnam Children’s Center in
Roxbury. Brazelton opened his own private practice in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1950 and became an instructor at Harvard Medical School the following year.
He also began research on newborns, toddlers, and parents with the goal of helping parents better understand
and interact with their children. Among other areas, he
has focused on individual differences among newborns;
parent-infant attachment during the first four months of
life; and the effects of early intervention on at-risk infants. Based on his research, Brazelton developed the
NBAS, first published in 1973. The test, popularly called
“the Brazelton,” uses visual, auditory, and tactile stimuli
to assess how newborns respond to their environment. It
is widely used both clinically and as a research tool.
Brazelton’s interest in shifting the focus of pediatric
study from disease to infant development led him to

Josef Breuer made the crucial observations upon
which early psychoanalytic theory was based. He discovered that neuroses could arise from unconscious processes and, furthermore, that the neurotic symptoms could disappear when these underlying causes became part of the
conscious mind. He communicated these findings to Sigmund Freud and the two men entered into a collaboration. Breuer emphasized hypnosis. He also believed that
differing levels of consciousness are very important in
both normal and abnormal mental processes. Although
Freud eventually rejected this concept, it is now believed
to be of great significance. Breuer also was among the
most important physiologists of the nineteenth century.
Breuer was born in Vienna, Austria, in 1842. His father, Leopold Breuer, taught religion in Vienna’s Jewish
community. Breuer’s mother died when he was quite
young, and he was raised by his maternal grandmother
and educated by his father until the age of eight. He
graduated from the Akademisches Gymnasium of Vienna in 1858 and then studied at the university for one
year, before enrolling in the medical school of the University of Vienna. He passed his medical exams in 1867
and went to work as assistant to the internist Johann Oppolzer at the university.

Studies physiological processes
Breuer’s first important scientific work was published in 1868. With Ewald Hering, a physiology profes-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

97

Josef Breuer

found the Child Development Unit at Children’s Hospital
Medical Center in Boston in 1972, together with Edward
Tronick. The unit provides medical students and other
professionals the opportunity to research early child development and also prepare for clinical work with parents
and children. Brazelton’s first book, Infants and Mothers
(1969), has sold more than a million copies and has been
translated into 18 languages. It has been followed by a
dozen more, including Toddlers and Parents (1974), On
Becoming a Family (1981), and Working and Caring
(1984), as well as a series of videotapes on child development. Brazelton also writes a syndicated newspaper advice column and since 1984 has had his own program,
What Every Baby Knows, on cable television.

Brief reactive psychosis

sor at the military medical school in Vienna, he demonstrated the reflex nature of respiration. It was one of the
first examples of a feedback mechanism in the autonomic nervous system of a mammal. Their experiments
changed the way scientists viewed the relationship of the
lungs to the nervous system, and the mechanism is still
known as the Hering-Breuer reflex.
In 1868, Breuer married Matilda Altmann, and they
eventually had five children. Following Oppolzer’s death
in 1871, Breuer entered private practice. Still, he found
time for scientific study. He worked in his home, with
funds derived from his medical practice. Turning his attention to the physiology of the ear, he discovered the
function of the semicircular canals. This work provided
the foundation for our modern understanding of how
sensory receptors detect position and movement. In all,
Breuer published approximately 20 papers on physiology over a period of 40 years. Although he joined the faculty of internal medicine at the University of Vienna in
1875, his relationships there were strained; he resigned
his position in 1885.

The story of Anna O.
It was in 1880 that Breuer first observed the development of a severe mental illness in one of his patients,
“Anna O.” Breuer found that he could reduce the severity
of Anna’s symptoms by encouraging her to describe her
fantasies and hallucinations. He began using hypnosis
to facilitate these sessions. He found that when she recalled a series of memories back to a traumatic memory,
one of her many symptoms would disappear, a process
that Breuer called cathartic. Soon, Breuer was treating
Anna with hypnosis twice a day and eventually all of her
symptoms were gone. Breuer drew two important conclusions from his work with Anna: that her symptoms
were the result of thoughts that were buried in her unconscious and that when these thoughts were spoken and
became conscious, the symptoms disappeared. Breuer’s
treatment of Anna O. is the first example of “deep psychotherapy” carried out over an extended time period.
Breuer did not publish the results of Anna’s treatment. However, he taught his methods to Sigmund Freud
and, together, they began to develop this new form of
psychotherapy. Breuer did not continue to treat patients
such as Anna. Although he claimed that the demands of
his busy medical practice prevented him from pursuing
psychotherapy, Freud believed that he was upset by the
strong attachment that Anna developed for Breuer towards the end of her treatment, a phenomenon that became known as transference. When Freud began to use
Breuer’s methods of psychoanalysis, Breuer and Freud
discussed Freud’s patients and the techniques and results
98

of their treatments. In 1893, they published an article on
their work and, two years later, the book which marked
the beginning of psychanalytic theory, Studien über Hysterie. At about the same time, their collaboration—and
their friendship—came to an end. Apparently Breuer’s
ambivalence concerning the value of their work fueled
their discord. However their final break came about over
the question of childhood memories of seduction. At the
time, Freud believed that most of his patients had actually been seduced as children. Only later did he realize that
Breuer was correct in believing these to be memories of
childhood fantasies.
Breuer dropped his study of psychoanalysis, whereas Freud continued to develop his theories independently. However, among other concepts, Breuer usually is
credited with having first suggested that perception and
memory are different psychic processes and with having
developed a theory of hallucinations. Breuer’s background in physiology had a profound influence on the
development of his theories and it is likely that his influence on the work of Sigmund Freud has been underestimated. Some physicians, the “Breuerians,” continued for
a time to use Breuer’s original cathartic techniques without adopting Freud’s modifications and amplifications.
Breuer was regarded as one of the finest physicians
and scientists in Vienna. In 1894, he was elected to the
Viennese Academy of Science. Breuer died in Vienna in
1925. His daughter Dora later committed suicide rather
than be deported by the Nazis. Likewise, one of his
granddaughters died at the hands of the Nazis. Other
members of his family emigrated.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Cranefield, Paul F. “Breuer, Josef.” In Dictionary of Scientific
Biography, edited by Charles Coulston Gillispie, vol. 2.
New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1970.
Hirschmüller, Albrecht. The Life and Work of Josef Breuer:
Physiology and Psychoanalysis. New York: New York
University Press, 1989.

Brief reactive psychosis
An uncommon acute mental disorder precipitated
by an event that causes intense psychological stress.

Episodes that are classified as brief reactive psychoses may last more than two hours but less than one
month. Typical triggering events can be the death of a
spouse or other loved one, combat trauma, financial dis-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Pierre Paul Broca
1824-1880
French medical doctor and anthropologist known
for his role in the discovery of specialized functions in different areas of the brain.

Pierre Paul Broca, the son of a Huguenot doctor,
was born near Bordeaux, France, in 1824. After studying
mathematics and physical science at the local university,
he entered medical school at the University of Paris in
1841. He received his M.D. in 1849. Though trained as a
pathologist, anatomist, and surgeon, Broca’s interests
were not limited to the medical profession. His versatility and tireless dedication to science permitted him to
make significant contributions to other fields, most notably to anthropology.
The application of his expertise in anatomy outside
the field of medicine began in 1847 as a member of a
commission charged with reporting on archaeological
excavations of a cemetery. The project permitted Broca
to combine his anatomical and mathematical skills with
his interests in anthropology.
The discovery in 1856 of Neanderthal Man once again
drew Broca into anthropology. Controversy surrounded the
interpretation of Neanderthal. It was clearly a human skull,
but more primitive and apelike than a modern skull and the
soil stratum in which it was found indicated a very early
date. Neanderthal’s implications for evolutionary theory
demanded thorough examination of the evidence to determine decisively whether it was simply a congenitally deformed Homo sapiens or a primitive human form. Both as
an early supporter of Charles Darwin and as an expert in
human anatomy, Broca supported the latter view. Broca’s
view eventually prevailed, though not until the discovery of
the much more primitive Java Man (then known as
Pithecanthropus, but later Homo erectus).

Broca is best known for his role in the discovery of
specialized functions in different areas of the brain. In
1861, he was able to show, using post-mortem analysis
of patients who had lost the ability to speak, that such
loss was associated with damage to a specific area of the
brain. The area, located toward the front of the brain’s
left hemisphere, became known as Broca’s convolution.
Aside from its importance to the understanding of
human physiology, Broca’s findings addressed questions
concerning the evolution of language.
All animals living in groups communicate with one
another. Non-human primates have the most complex
communication system other than human language.
They use a wide range of gestures, facial expressions,
postures, and vocalizations, but are limited in the variety
of expressions and are unable to generate new signals
under changing circumstances. Humans alone possess
the capacity for language rather than relying on a body
language vocabulary. Language permits humans to generate an infinite number of messages and ultimately allows the transmission of information—the learned and
shared patterns of behavior characteristic of human social groups, which anthropologists call culture—from
generation to generation. The development of language
spurred human evolution by permitting new ways of social interaction, organization, and thought.
Given the importance assigned to human speech in
human evolution, scientists began to look for the physical
preconditions of speech. The fact that apes have the minimal parts necessary for speech indicated that the shape
and arrangement of the vocal apparatus was insufficient
for the development of speech. The vocalizations produced by other animals are involuntary and incapable of
conscious alteration. However, human speech requires
codifying thought and transmitting it in patterned strings
of sound. The area of the brain isolated by Broca sends
the code to another part of the brain that controls the
muscles of the face, jaw, tongue, palate, and larynx, setting the speech apparatus in motion. This area and a companion area that controls the understanding of language,
known as Wernicke’s area, are detectable in early fossil
skulls of the genus Homo. The brain of Homo was evolving toward the use of language, although the vocal chamber was still inadequate to articulate speech. Broca discovered one piece in the puzzle of human communication
and speech, which permits the transmission of culture.
Equally important, Broca contributed to the development of physical anthropology, one of the four subfields of anthropology. Craniology, the scientific measurement of the skull, was a major focus of physical anthropology during this period. Mistakenly considering
contemporary human groups as if they were living fossils, anthropologists became interested in the nature of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

99

Pierre Paul Broca

aster, or any other major event involving psychosocial
stress. Brief reactive psychosis has a sudden onset, typically in late adolescence and early adulthood, and is
characterized by delusions, hallucinations, incoherent
speech, disorganized or catatonic behavior, and possibly
aggressive or suicidal impulses. Although episodes of
brief reactive psychosis occur in a short period of time,
the degree of cognitive impairment during these episodes
may be very severe, and often individuals with this condition must be prevented from acting in dangerously inappropriate or self-destructive ways. Complete recovery
usually follows, however, and the patient is restored to
his or her prior level of functioning.

Jerome S. Bruner

human variability and attempted to explain the varying
levels of technological development observed worldwide
by looking for a correspondence between cultural level
and physical characteristics. Broca furthered these studies by inventing at least twenty-seven instruments for
making measurements of the human body, and by developing standardized techniques of measurement.
Broca’s many contributions to anthropology helped
to establish its firm scientific foundation at a time when
the study of nature was considered a somewhat sinister
science.

Jerome S. Bruner
1915American psychologist and educator whose principal areas of study are in the fields of cognitive psychology and language development.

Jerome S. Bruner was born in New York City and
educated at Duke University. During World War II,
Bruner worked on the subject of propaganda and popular
attitudes for U.S. Army intelligence at General Dwight
D. Eisenhower’s headquarters in France. He obtained his
Ph.D. from Harvard University in 1947, after which he
became a member of the faculty, serving as professor of
psychology, as well as cofounder and director of the
Center for Cognitive Studies. In 1972 Bruner left Harvard to teach for several years at Oxford University. He
returned to Harvard as a visiting professor in 1979 and
two years later joined the faculty of the new School for
Social Research in New York City. Bruner’s early work
in cognitive psychology focused on the sequences of decisions made by subjects as part of their problem-solving
strategies in experimental situations.
Beginning in the 1940s, Bruner, together with his
colleague Leo Postman, did important work on the ways
in which needs, motivations, and expectations (or “mental sets”) affect perception. Their approach, sometimes
referred to as the “New Look,” contrasted a functional
perspective with the prevailing “formal” one that treated
perception as a self-sufficient process to be considered
separately from the world around it. When Bruner and
Postman showed young children toys and plain blocks of
equal height, the children, expecting toys to be larger than
blocks, thought the toys were taller. The toys also seemed
to increase in size when the researchers made them unavailable. In further experiments involving mental sets,
the two scientists used an instrument called a tachistoscope to show their subjects brief views of playing cards,
including some nonstandard cards, such as a red ace of
100

Jerome S. Bruner (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

spades. As long as the subjects were not alerted to the
presence of the abnormal cards, almost none saw them.
Bruner’s work in cognitive psychology led to an interest in the cognitive development of children and related issues of education, and in the 1960s he developed
a theory of cognitive growth. Bruner’s theories, which
approach development from a different angle than those
of Jean Piaget, focus on the environmental and experiential factors influencing each individual’s specific development pattern. His argument that human intellectual
ability develops in stages from infancy to adulthood
through step-by-step progress in how the mind is used
has influenced experimental psychologists and educators
throughout the world. Bruner is particularly interested in
language and other representations of human thought. In
one of his best-known papers, Bruner defines three
modes of representing, or “symbolizing,” human
thought. The enactive mode involves human motor capacities and includes activities such as using tools. The
iconic mode pertains to sensory capacities. Finally, the
symbolic mode involves reasoning, and is exemplified by
language, which plays a central role in Bruner’s theories
of cognition and development. He has called it “a
means, not only for representing experience, but also for
transforming it.”

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Child development; Cognitive development; Developmental psychology
Further Reading
Bruner, Jerome S. In Search of Mind: Essays in Autobiography. New York: Harper & Row, 1983.

Bulimia
An eating disorder in which a person indulges in
recurrent episodes of binge eating, followed by
purging through self-induced vomiting or by the
use of laxatives and/or diuretics in order to prevent
weight gain.

The symptoms of bulimia, or bulimia nervosa, include eating uncontrollably (binging) and then purging
by dieting, fasting, exercising, vomiting, or abusing laxatives or diuretics. A binge involves a large amount of
food, for example, several boxes of cookies, a loaf of
bread, a half gallon of ice cream, and a bucket of fried
chicken, eaten in a short and well-defined time period.
Specific behaviors associated with bulimia include: 1)
eating high-calorie “junk food” (candy bars, cookies, ice
cream, etc.); 2) eating surreptitiously; 3) eating until
stopped by a stomach ache, drowsiness, or external interruption; 4) a tendency to go on “crash diets”; and 5)
weight that varies over a 10-pound (4.5 kg) range. Although all of these behaviors are not present in all bulimics, the presence of at least three makes it likely that an

individual is suffering from the disorder. In general,
binging episodes occur at least twice a week, and may
take place two or more times a day.
Unlike anorexics, bulimics may be close to normal
weight or overweight (within 15 percent of normal standards) and do not suffer from amenorrhea or lose interest
in sex. Bulimics feel out of control, realize that their eating patterns are abnormal, and experience intense feelings of guilt and shame over their binging. Their preoccupation with body weight and secretive eating behaviors may combine with depression or mood swings.
Possible warning signals of bulimia may include irregular periods, dental problems, swollen cheeks, heartburn,
bloating, and alcohol or drug abuse.
The American Anorexia/Bulimia Association estimates that up to 5 percent of college-age women are bulimic and more than 90 percent of all bulimics are
women. The onset of the disorder commonly occurs in
the late teens or early twenties and can begin after a period of dieting or weight loss. Risk factors for the disorder
involve a pattern of excessive dieting in an attempt to
weigh less, a history of depression or alcoholism, low
self-esteem, obese parents or siblings, and a history of
anorexia nervosa. It has also been suggested that bulimia may have physiological causes, including a defective
satiety mechanism.
In order to reduce the risks of developing an eating
disorder, cultural attitudes associating thinness and beauty with personal worth and happiness must change to reflect a greater emphasis on developing healthier attitudes
and eating behaviors in early childhood. Individuals
must learn to value themselves and others for intrinsic
rather than extrinsic qualities such as appearance.
Although bulimia is seldom life-threatening, it is a serious illness with severe medical consequences, including
abdominal pain, vomiting blood, electrolyte imbalance
possibly leading to weakness or cardiac arrest, muscle
weakness, and intestinal damage. Bulimics and anorexics
rarely cure themselves and the longer the behavior continues, the more difficult it is to help the individual change.
The most effective treatment involves a team approach
consisting of medical evaluation, individual and/or group
psychotherapy, nutritional counseling, anti-depressant
medication, and possible hospitalization. Psychotherapy
generally consists of investigating the patient’s unconscious motivations for binging in combination with behavior modification techniques to help cope with the disease. Commonly recommended medications include
diphenylhydantoin (Dilantin), an anticonvulsant, and tricyclic antidepressants. Even with treatment, only about
one-third of bulimics appear to recover while another third
show some improvement in their eating behavior. The re-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

101

Bulimia

Bruner’s view that the student should become an active participant in the educational process has been widely accepted. In The Process of Education (1960) he asserts that, given the appropriate teaching method, every
child can successfully study any subject at any stage of
his or her intellectual development. Bruner’s later work
involves the study of the pre-speech developmental
processes and linguistic communication skills in children. The Relevance of Education (1971) applied his theories to infant development. Bruner was appointed a visiting member of the Institute for Advanced Study at
Princeton University. In 1963, he received the Distinguished Scientific Award from the American Psychological Association, and in 1965 he served as its president. Bruner’s expertise in the field of education led to
his appointment to the President’s Advisory Panel of Education, and he has also advised agencies of the United
Nations. Bruner’s books include A Study of Thinking
(1956), On Knowing: Essays For the Left Hand (1962),
On Knowing (1964), Toward a Theory of Instruction
(1966), Processes of Cognitive Growth (1968), Beyond
the Information Given (1973), and Child’s Talk (1983).

Bullies

maining third do not respond to treatment and 10 to 20
percent of these people eventually die of the disease.
See also Anorexia; Body image
Further Information
American Anorexia/Bulimia Association (AABA). 418 E. 76th
St., New York, New York 10021, (212) 734–1114.
American Dietetic Association (ADA) NCND-Eating Disorders. 216 W. Jackson Blvd., Chicago, Illinois 60606,
(800) 366–1655.
National Anorexic Aid Society. 445 E. Dublin-Granville Rd.,
Worthington, Ohio 43229, (614) 436–1112.
National Association of Anorexia Nervosa and Associated Disorders (ANAD). Box 7, Highland Park, Illinois 60035,
(708) 831–3438.

Bullies
An aggressive child who repeatedly victimizes a
less powerful child with physical and/or emotional
abuse.

Bullying usually involves an older or larger child (or
several children) victimizing a single child who is incapable of defending himself or herself. Although much bullying goes unreported, it is estimated that in the average
school an incident of bullying occurs approximately once
every seven minutes. Bullying occurs at about the same
rate regardless of class size or school size, but, for an unknown reason, rural schools appear to have a higher rate of
bullying than urban or suburban schools. Even when bullying is reported, it is not always taken seriously by teachers
and parents because many adults believe that children
should learn to “stand up for themselves” or “fight back.”
Although the stereotypical bully is male, girls engage in bullying behavior almost as often as boys. Their
tactics differ, however, in that they are less visible. Boy
bullies tend to resort to one-on-one physical aggression,
while girls tend to bully as a group through social exclusion and the spreading of rumors. Girls who would never
bully individually will often take part in group bullying
activities such as “slam books,” notebooks that are circulated among the peer group in which comments and criticisms are written about particular individuals.
Bullying begins at a very early age; it is not uncommon to find bullies in preschool classrooms. Up until
about age seven, bullies appear to choose their victims at
random. After that, they single out specific children to
torment on a regular basis. Nearly twice as much bullying goes on in grades two to four as in grades six to
eight, and, as bullies grow older, they use less physical
abuse and more verbal abuse.
102

Until about sixth grade, bullies are not necessarily
unpopular. They average two or three friends, and other
children seem to admire them for their physical toughness. By high school, however, their social acceptance
has diminished to the point that their only “friends” are
other bullies. Despite their unpopularity, bullies have relatively high self-esteem. Perhaps this is because they
process social information inaccurately.
For example, bullies attribute hostile intentions to people around them and therefore perceive provocation where
it does not exist. “What are you staring at?” is a common
opening line of bullies. For the bully, these perceived
slights serve as justification for aggressive behavior.
In general, children who become the targets of bullies
have a negative view of violence and go out of their way
to avoid conflict. They tend to be “loners” who exhibit
signs of vulnerability before being singled out by a bully.
Being victimized leads these children—who are already
lacking in self-esteem—to feel more anxious and thereby
increase their vulnerability to further victimization. Being
the target of a bully leads to social isolation and rejection
by peers, and victims tend to internalize others’ negative
views, further eroding their self-esteem. Although bullying actually lessens during adolescence, that is the period
when peer rejection is most painful for victims. In a number of well-publicized cases (in Scandinavia, Japan, and
Australia, as well as the United States), adolescents tormented by bullies have been driven to suicide.
Evidence indicates that bullying is not a phase a
child will outgrow. In a long-term study of more than
500 children, University of Michigan researchers discovered that children who were viewed as the most aggressive by their peers at age eight grew up to commit more
(and more serious) crimes as adults. Other studies indicate that, as adults, bullies are far more likely to abuse
their spouses and children.
Further Reading
Olweus, Dan. Bullying at School:What We Know and What We
Can Do. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1993.

Further Information
Bullies and Scapegoats Project.
Educators for Social Responsibility. 23 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, (617) 492–1764.
National School Safety Center. 4165 Thousand Oaks Blvd.,
Westlake Village, CA 91362, (805) 777–9977.

Bystander effect
The effect of the presence of others on an individual’s perception of and response to a situation.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Experiments have been developed to demonstrate
the components of the bystander effect. In one experiment designed to test the power of pluralistic ignorance,
male subjects were given appointments for an interview.
As they wait in an outer room, smoke begins to pour
through a ventilation duct. Researchers observed the
subjects through a one-way mirror for three minutes.
Seventy-five percent of the subjects who were alone in
the waiting room reported the smoke within two minutes, while 13 percent of those tested in groups reported
the smoke. Those who did not report the smoke ex-

TIPS FOR PREVENTING
BULLYING BEHAVIOR
Parents and teachers can do a number of things to
prevent bullying:
• All children should be given regular opportunities to
discuss bullying and ways to deal with bullies. in
role-playing exercises, for example, children can
practice saying, “Leave me alone” and walking away.
• Children can be taught simple measures to lessen the
likelihood of becoming the target of a bully. Looking
people in the eye, speaking up, and standing straight
are just a few behaviors that communicate self-confidence.
• Children who tend to be loners (potential targets of
bullies) can be paired up with socially competent
“models.” Some children need a little help learning
how to make friends.
• Because bullies are most likely to strike during unsupervised times such as recess, children should be provided with as much structured activity as possible.

plained that, since others in the room did not seem to be
concerned, the smoke must have been air conditioning
vapors or steam. This experiment illustrates that bystanders can contribute significantly to an individual’s
interpretation of a situation.
Further Reading
Latani, Bibb. The Unresponsive Bystander: Why Doesn’t He
Help? New York: Appleton-Century Crofts, 1970.
Palma, Giuseppe. Apathy and Participation: Mass Politics in
Western Societies. New York: Free Press, 1970.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

103

Bystander effect

The term bystander effect, or bystander apathy, was
first employed by psychologists in the early 1960s. The
1964 murder of New Yorker Kitty Genovese provides an
illustration of this phenomenon. Genovese, who was
being savagely attacked outside her apartment building,
screamed for help for over 30 minutes. Although 40
neighbors heard Genovese’s desperate cries, no one
came to her aid or even called the police. Researchers
have explained several components of the bystander effect. First, witnesses must perceive the situation as an
emergency. When others are present, not taking action or
behaving as if nothing were wrong, all observers tend to
view the situation as a nonemergency. Psychologists describe this as pluralistic ignorance, in which the behavior of the group causes each individual to be lulled into
inaction. In the case of Genovese’s murder, her neighbors were not hearing her cries for help as a group. Each
person, isolated in his or her own apartment, heard the
disturbance and had no way of knowing the reactions of
others who were hearing Genovese’s screams. However,
each person could believe that someone else was taking
action, and therefore the responsibility for response fell
to that other person. Psychologists call this reaction diffusion of responsibility.

C
Mary Whiton Calkins
1863-1930
American psychologist and philosopher who became the first woman president of both the American Psychological Association (1905) and the
American Philosophical Association (1918).

The eldest of five children born to Reverend Wolcott
Calkins, a strong-willed, intellectually gifted evangelical
minister, and Charlotte Grosvenor Whiton, a daughter of
an established New England Puritan family, Mary
Whiton Calkins grew up in a close-knit family that valued
education. As her mother’s mental and physical health
began to deteriorate, Calkins took on increased responsibilities for her younger siblings as well as her mother.
After earning a B.A. from Smith College with a
concentration in the classics, Calkins began teaching
Greek at Wellesley College in 1887. In 1888, she was offered the new position of instructor in psychology there,
which was contingent upon a year’s training in the discipline. Consistent with university policy toward women
in 1890, Calkins was granted special permission to attend classes in psychology and philosophy at Harvard
University and in laboratory psychology at Clark University in Worcester, but was denied admission to their
graduate studies programs. She was also denied permission to attend regular Harvard seminars until faculty
members William James and Josiah Royce (18551916), as well as Calkins’s father, intervened on her behalf. After she was enrolled in James’s seminar, four
men enrolled in the class dropped it in protest. Attendance at James’s seminar led to individual study with
him, and within a year Calkins had published a paper on
association, suggesting a modification to James’s recently published Principles of Psychology. Her paper was enthusiastically received by her mentor, who referred to it
when he later revised his book.
Returning to Wellesley in the fall of 1891, Calkins
established the first psychology laboratory at a women’s
104

Mary Whiton Calkins (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

college in the United States with help from Edmund Sanford, a faculty member at Clark, with whom she collaborated on an experimental study of dreams published in
the American Journal of Psychology. In 1893, seeking
further laboratory training, Calkins returned to Harvard
to work with James’s protégé, Hugo Münsterberg (18631916), investigating the factors influencing memory.
During the course of this work, Calkins originated the
“paired associates” technique, a method of testing memory by presenting test subjects with paired numbers and
colors. Her findings revealed that numbers paired with
bright colors were retained better than those associated

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In 1895, Calkins requested and took an examination
equivalent to the official Ph.D. exam. Her performance was
praised by James as “the most brilliant examination for the
Ph.D. that we have had at Harvard,” surpassing that of his
junior colleague, George Santayana (1863-1952). Nevertheless, Calkins was still denied admission to candidacy for
the degree. With the creation of Rad-cliffe College in April
1902, Calkins was one of the first four women to be offered the Ph.D., but she refused it in protest.
Calkins taught at Wellesley College until her retirement in 1929, and had published four books and more
than 100 papers in psychology and philosophy. In 1901,
she published a well-received Introduction to Psychology
and spent the early 1900s developing a psychology of the
self that anticipated later theories of personality. In 1909,
Columbia University awarded Calkins a honorary Doctor
of Letters (Litt.D.) and in 1910, Smith College granted her
the Doctor of Laws (LL.D.). Calkins died in 1930.
Further Reading
Scarborough, Elizabeth and Laurel Furumoto. Untold Lives:
The First Generation of American WomenPsychologists,
17-51. New York: Columbia University Press, 1987.

Case study methodologies
Research procedures that focuses on a particular
individual or group.

A case study (or case history) consists of an intensive, detailed description and analysis of a particular individual, group, or event. Information may be obtained
by means of careful observation, interviews, psychological tests, or archival records. Case study research is useful when the researcher is starting to investigate a new
area in which there is little information available. Case
studies are a rich source of ideas and hypotheses for future research. They can also be used to disconfirm a generally accepted principle. For example, the motor theory
of speech perception was based on the claim that decoding and interpreting speech was dependent on the listener’s ability to produce speech. In other words, an inability to speak should be accompanied by an inability to
comprehend speech. In 1962, Eric Lenneberg reported
the outcome of extensive tests over a five-year period on
a young boy who was totally inarticulate because of an
inborn defect of his vocal tract. Testing showed that he
had normal and complete understanding of spoken lan-

guage. This single counterexample was sufficient to invalidate the theory’s basic assumption.
Another widely cited case study is that of Phineas
Gage. He was a railway construction foreman who suffered a bizarre accident in 1848 when a three-foot-long
iron rod was driven into his skull. The inch-thick rod entered beneath his left eye and exited through the top of
his head, destroying much of the prefrontal cortex. Because Gage survived, it provided an opportunity to investigate the effects of brain damage on outward behavior.
Although he could still speak and move normally, his
friends reported a big change in his personality. The accident transformed him from an amiable, dependable
worker into an inconsiderate, foul-mouthed lout. This
case, and others like it, suggest that parts of the frontal
lobes control social judgment, decision-making, and
goal-setting.
While findings from case studies can be valuable,
the method has limitations. One major weakness is poor
representativeness. Because of the exclusive focus on a
particular individual or group, the researcher has no way
of knowing whether that individual is typical of people
in general. Does the case of Phineas Gage tell us how
everyone with a similar injury might be affected? The
answer is no, because no two people could ever suffer
from precisely identical injuries. Definitive statements
about the relationship between brain damage and behavior can only be obtained by means of controlled investigative procedures. Moreover, case studies, by their very
nature, do not permit the researcher to draw any conclusions as to causality. In a conventional experiment, the
researcher usually has one or more specific hypotheses
that are tested by the controlled manipulation of the specific variables of interest. Case studies do not permit
careful control, thus it is impossible to identify a specific
causal association.
The difficulty of drawing causal inferences from individual case studies is further illustrated by the case of
Genie. Genie was a 13-year-old girl who had been grievously neglected by her parents for most of her childhood. From the age of 18 months she was confined to a
small room and denied any opportunity for social interactions or normal human contact. No one spoke to her,
and she was punished for making any sounds herself.
This sad case permitted researchers to test the hypothesis
that there is a critical period of language acquisition.
The critical period hypothesis maintained that a child’s
ability to learn its native language effectively ends at the
onset of puberty. Genie was 13 when she was rescued.
Of particular interest to scientists interested in language
learning was the fact that she could not speak. Her only
sounds were high-pitched whimpers. Placed in a nurturing environment, would Genie learn to speak? If so, the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

105

Case study methodologies

with neutral colors. However, the prime factor influencing memory was frequency of exposure. The results of
this research were published as a supplement to Psychological Review in 1896.

Catharsis

critical period hypothesis would be refuted. After several
years, Genie was able to use words to convey some of
her needs, but her grammar and pronunciation remained
abnormal and impoverished. While this case is supportive of the critical period hypothesis, crucial information
is missing from the picture. We cannot know if Genie
was born with mental deficits that might have prevented
normal language development, even in the absence of
her social isolation.
Because of their very narrow focus, case studies can
sometimes be very misleading. John was a normal baby
whose penis was burned beyond repair due to a surgical
accident in 1963. His doctors persuaded John’s parents
to have him undergo sex reassignment. At the age of seventeen months, John became “Joan,” and from then on
the child was treated as a girl. When Joan was evaluated
eight years later, the reassignment was judged a success.
The case received widespread publicity in textbooks and
the mass media. The John/Joan story was heralded as an
important demonstration of the influence of social factors in determining gender identity. By age 14, however, Joan suspected that she was a boy. Increasingly dissatisfied with her plight, she became depressed and suicidal. Eventually, Joan underwent plastic surgery and
was given male hormone treatments. Today, John is married and reasonably well adjusted. This case clearly illustrates the importance of constitutional factors in establishing gender identity. It also shows us how risky it is to
make sweeping generalizations based on observations of
a single individual.
Timothy E. Moore
Further Reading
Christensen, L. Experimental methodology. Boston: Allyn &
Bacon, 1997.

Catharsis
The release of repressed psychic energy.

The term catharsis originated from the Greek word
katharsis, meaning to purge, or purgation. In psychology, the term was first employed by Sigmund Freud’s colleague Josef Breuer (1842-1925), who developed a
“cathartic” treatment for persons suffering from hysterical symptoms through the use of hypnosis. While under
hypnosis, Breuer’s patients were able to recall traumatic
experiences, and through the process of expressing the
original emotions that had been repressed and forgotten,
they were relieved of their symptoms. Catharsis was also
106

central to Freud’s concept of psychoanalysis, but he replaced hypnosis with free association.
In other schools of psychotherapy, catharsis refers
to the therapeutic release of emotions and tensions, although not necessarily unconscious ones such as Freud
emphasized. Certain types of therapy in particular, such
as psychodrama and primal scream therapy, have
stressed the healing potential of cathartic experiences.
See also Repression
Further Reading
Jenson, Jean C. Reclaiming Your Life: A Step-by-Step Guide to
Using Regression Therapy to Overcome the Effects of
Childhood Abuse. New York: Dutton, 1995.

Cathexis
In classic psychoanalysis, the investment of psychic energy in a person or object connected with
the gratification of instincts.

The English word for cathexis—which replaces the
German besetzung—is derived from the Greek word for
“I occupy.” Through the process of cathexis, which Sigmund Freud saw as analogous to the channeling of an
electrical charge, the psychic energy of the id is bound to
a selection of objects. An infant’s earliest cathected objects are his mother’s breast, his own mouth, and the
process of sucking.
When a cathected object becomes a source of conflict, as parents do during the Oedipal stage, anti-cathexes redirect all thoughts about the object to the unconscious level in order to relieve anxiety. Thus, cathexes
originate in the id, while anti-cathexes are formed by the
ego and the superego.
Freud believed that most personality processes are
regulated by cathexes and anti-cathexes. He considered
anti-cathexes as an internal form of frustration, paralleling the external frustration of instincts that one encounters from environmental factors over which one has no
control. In the case of anti-cathexis, this frustration is
provided internally by one’s own psychic mechanisms.
However, it cannot occur until one has experienced external frustration, generally in the form of parental discipline. Having been subjected to external controls, one
becomes able to develop inner ones.
Cathexes are involved in the repression of memories, which can be recalled either by weakening the anticathexis or strengthening the cathexis. Either process is
difficult and may be facilitated by the use of special

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Freud, Sigmund. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. London: Hogarth
Press, 1962.
Firestone, Robert. Psychological Defenses in Everyday Life.
New York: Human Sciences Press, 1989.
Goleman, Daniel. Vital Lies, Simple Truths: the Psychology of
Self-Deception. New York : Simon and Schuster, 1985.
Hall, Calvin S. A Primer of Freudian Psychology. New York:
Harper and Row, 1982.

James McKeen Cattell
1860-1944
American pioneer in psychological research techniques and founder of a psychological testing company.

James McKeen Cattell developed an approach to
psychological research that continues to dominate the
field of psychology today. During psychology’s early
years, most research focused on the sensory responses of
single individuals studied in depth because Wilhelm
Wundt (1832-1920), the first experimental psychologist,
favored this approach. As Cattell’s ideas developed, his
perspective diverged greatly from Wundt’s, and Cattell
developed techniques that allowed him to study groups
of people and the individual differences among them.
Cattell’s career was quite varied. He traveled to the
University of Göttingen to study with the philosopher
Rudolf Hermann Lotze (1817-1881) and later with
Wundt at Leipzig. Following that, he returned home to
the United States and worked with G. Stanley Hall
(1844-1924), one of America’s most famous psychologists. Apparently, Cattell’s relationship with Hall was
less than positive, and Cattell did not complete his doctoral work at that time. When he was with Hall, however, Cattell developed an interest in studying psychological processes.
Subsequently, he returned to Leipzig and earned his
doctorate with Wundt, although his correspondence with
his parents revealed that Cattell did not hold Wundt in
high esteem as a scientist. According to some, those letters also depict Cattell as arrogant, self-confident, and
disrespectful of others. While in Germany, Cattell improved on existing psychological instrumentation and invented new ways to study psychological processes.
After leaving Germany, Cattell taught briefly in the
United States, then traveled to England and worked with

Sir Francis Galton (1822-1911). Cattell was highly impressed with Galton’s use of statistics and quantification
of research, and he also supported some of Galton’s
other ideas, such as the importance of individual differences and the application of scientific knowledge to create a eugenics movement.
Ultimately, Cattell adopted the practice of testing a
large number of research subjects and using statistics to
understand his results. Cattell coined the term “mental
test” and devoted a significant amount of time trying to
develop a useful intelligence test. He recorded the results of simple tasks (e.g., the speed of a person’s response to a simple sound, the ability to detect slight differences in weights of stimuli, and simple memory for
letters of the alphabet), hoping to find a correlation between sensory response and academic performance, or
intelligence. He was disappointed to find that, not only
did sensory performance fail to relate to academic success, the different sensory measures did not even correlate with one another. As a result, he abandoned such an
approach to mental testing.
Even though Cattell’s research on intelligence was
unsuccessful, he nonetheless exerted a dramatic influence on other American psychologists. During his career at Columbia University, more students earned
doctorates in psychology with him than with any other
psychologist. Cattell also affected psychology in the
United States in other ways. For example, he founded
the journal Psychological Review with another prominent psychologist, J. Mark Baldwin (1861-1934), then
resurrected the financially troubled journal Science,
which he acquired from Alexander Graham Bell. Cattell also helped start the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, one of the premier scientific
organizations in America today. He also published Scientific Monthly and School and Society. Not surprisingly, as his editing and publishing increased, his research diminished.
Cattell left the academic world in 1917 when Columbia University dismissed him because of his unpopular opposition to sending draftees into battle in the first
World War. He sued the University for libel and won
$40,000 in court, but he did not return to the institution.
Instead, he attempted further application of psychological testing when he founded the Psychological Corporation, a company organized to promote commercial psychological tests. His entrepreneurial abilities failed him
in this endeavor, however; the company earned only
about $50 during its first two years. After he left, the organization began to prosper, and today, the Psychological Corporation is a flourishing business. Cattell continued his work as a spokesperson for applied psychology
until his death.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

107

James McKeen Cattell

techniques, including hypnosis, free association, and
the interpretation of dreams.

Raymond Bernard Cattell

Further Reading
Benjamin, L. T., Jr. A History of Psychology: Original Sources
and Contemporary Research. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1988.
Schultz, D. P., and S.E. Schultz. A History of Modern Psychology. 6th ed. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace College Publishers, 1996.

Raymond Bernard Cattell
1905-1998
American psychologist who designed personality
and intelligence tests and espoused controversial
theories of eugenics.

Raymond B. Cattell was one of psychology’s most
prolific scholars. In a career spanning over half a century
he wrote more than 50 books and 500 research articles, and
his contributions to personality and intelligence testing
are widely regarded as invaluable. Yet some of his theories
about natural selection, particularly as put forth in a philosophy known as Beyondism, were attacked as racist and
caused a bitter controversy only months before his death.
Cattell was born in Hilltop, England, on March 20,
1905. He grew up in Devon, where he developed a lifelong
love of sailing and the sea. He attended the University of
London, where he received his undergraduate degree in
chemistry in 1924 and his Ph.D. in psychology in 1929. He
taught briefly and worked at a psychology clinic until
1937, when he moved to the United States to take a teaching position at Columbia University. From there he moved
on to Clark University and Harvard before arriving in 1946
at the University of Illinois, where he stayed for 27 years.

Raymond Cattell (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

Cattell retired from the University of Illinois in 1973
and after five years in Colorado moved to Hawaii. There,
he accepted a part-time position at the University of
Hawaii, where he continued to teach, conduct research,
and write. He also took the opportunity to spend leisure
time with his third wife and enjoyed visits from his five
children and two stepchildren.

Innovator of personality tests
During the Second World War, in addition to his
teaching duties, Cattell worked in the Adjutant General’s
office, where he devised psychological tests for the military. Throughout his career, Cattell created a number of
such tests to measure intelligence and to assess personality traits. The best known of these is the Sixteen Personality Factor questionnaire (16PF). First published in
1949, the 16PF profiles individuals using 16 different
personality traits, such as emotional stability (easily
upset vs. calm), impulsiveness (sober vs. enthusiastic),
and conformity (expedient vs. conscientious). These are
measured with what Cattell calls “second-order factors,”
including extroversion, anxiety, and independence. The
test is still widely used by corporations and institutions
to determine an individual’s compatibility with different
occupations and overall psychological character.
108

Beyondism and a storm of controvery
The publication of Beyondism: Religion from Science in 1987 dramatically altered the remainder of Cattell’s life as well as his scientific legacy. Cattell intended
the book to be a discussion of his theories on evolution
and natural selection. He believed that natural selection
among humans was governed by individual genetic and
cultural selection. However, his advocacy of eugenics
(the study of improving the human race), was extremely
controversial, particularly because eugenics was the
pseudo-scientific rationale for Nazi genocide. Cattell
claimed, for example, that among the tenets of Beyondism was the idea that races as we know them today
would not exist in the future. “The genetic groupings
(races) of the future,” he wrote, “will arise from self-conscious selection by each cultural group.” The question

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Central nervous system

many critics asked was whether Cattell’s theories were
simply his approbation for natural selection or a call for
something more ominous. The fact that Cattell had acknowledged Arthur Jensen and William Shockley—
two scientists who had claimed that blacks were genetically less intelligent than whites—in his book only furthered people’s suspicions.
The issue came to a head in the summer of 1997,
when Cattell was scheduled to receive a lifetime achievement award from the American Psychological Foundation
(APF). Almost as soon as APF had announced its decision, there were protests, some from prominent citizens
and organizations. The APF trustees postponed the award
presentation so they could further investigate. Cattell,
ninety-two years old and in failing health, attempted to
resolve the furor by declining the award. He then wrote
an open letter to the American Psychological Association (APA) defending himself and his work. He asserted
that he detested racism, and that he had only ever advocated voluntary eugenics. His health declined further, and
he died quietly on February 2, 1998, at home in Hawaii.
George A. Milite
Further Reading
Cattell, Raymond B. Beyondism: Religion from Science. New
York Praeger Publishers, 1987.
Cattell, Raymond B. Factor Analysis: An Introduction and
Manual for the Psychologist and Social Scientist. New
York: Harper, 1952.
Cattell, Raymond B. General Psychology. Cambridge, MA:
Sci-Art Publishers, 1941.
“Lifetime Achievement Award is Questioned.” APA Monitor,
(October 1997).

Central nervous system
In humans, that portion of the nervous system that
lies within the brain and spinal cord; it receives impulses from nerve cells throughout the body, regulates bodily functions, and directs behavior.

The central nervous system contains billions of
nerve cells, called neurons, and a greater number of support cells, or glia. Until recently, scientists thought that
the only function of glial cells—whose name means
“glue”—was to hold the neurons together, but current research suggests a more active role in facilitating communication. The neurons, which consist of three elements—
dendrites, cell body, and axon—send electrical impulses
from cell to cell along pathways which receive, process,
store, and retrieve information. The dendrites are the

The brain and spinal cord comprise the central nervous
system. At the right is a magnified view of the spinal cord
showing the individual nerves. The inset shows an
individual axon covered with a myelin sheath. (John Bavosi.
Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

message-receiving portions of the neuron and the axons
are the message-sending part of the cell. Both are
branching fibers that reach out in many extensions to
join the neuron to other neurons. The junction between
the axon of one cell and the dendrite of another is a
minute gap, eighteen millionths of an inch wide, which
is called a synapse.
The spinal cord is a long bundle of neural tissue
continuous with the brain that occupies the interior
canal of the spinal column and functions as the primary
communication link between the brain and the rest of the
body. It is the origin of 31 bilateral pairs of spinal nerves
which radiate outward from the central nervous system
through openings between adjacent vertebrae. The spinal
cord receives signals from the peripheral senses and relays them to the brain. Its sensory neurons, which send
sense data to the brain, are called afferent, or receptor,
neurons; motor neurons, which receive motor commands
from the brain, are called efferent, or effector, neurons.
The brain is a mass of neural tissue that occupies the
cranial cavity of the skull and functions as the center of
instinctive, emotional, and cognitive processes. Twelve

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

109

Cerebellum

pairs of cranial nerves enter the brain directly. It is composed of three primary divisions: the forebrain, midbrain,
and hindbrain, which are divided into the left and right
hemispheres and control multiple functions such as receiving sensory messages, movement, language, regulating involuntary body processes, producing emotions,
thinking, and memory. The first division, the forebrain,
is the largest and most complicated of the brain structures
and is responsible for most types of complex mental activity and behavior. It is involved in a huge array of responses, including initiating movements, receiving sensations, emoting, thinking, talking, creating, and imagining.
The forebrain consists of two main divisions: the diencephalon and the cerebrum. The cerebrum is the larger
part of the forebrain. Its parts, which are covered by the
cerebral cortex, include the corpus callosum, striatum,
septum, hippocampus, and amygdala.
The midbrain, or mesencephalon, is the small area
near the lower middle of the brain. Its three sections are the
tectum, tegmentum, and crus cerebri. Portions of the midbrain have been shown to control smooth and reflexive
movements, and it is important in the regulation of attention, sleep, and arousal. The hindbrain (rhombencephalon), which is basically a continuation of the spinal
cord, is the part of the brain that receives incoming messages first. Lying beneath the cerebral hemispheres, it consists of three structures: the cerebellum, the medulla, and
the pons, which control such vital functions of the autonomic nervous system as breathing, blood pressure, and
heart rate. The cerebellum, a large convoluted structure attached to the back surface of the brain stem, receives information from hundreds of thousands of sensory receptors in
the eyes, ears, skin, muscles, and joints, and uses the information to regulate coordination, balance, and movement,
especially finely coordinated movements such as threading
a needle or tracking a moving target. The medulla, situated
just above the spinal cord, controls heartbeat and breathing
and contains the reticular formation which extends into and
through the pons. The pons, a band of nerve fibers connecting the midbrain, medulla (hindbrain), and cerebrum, controls sleep and dreaming. The pons and medulla, because
of their shape and position at the base of the brain, are
often referred to as the brainstem.
Further Reading
Changeux, Jean-Pierre. Neuronal Man. New York: Pantheon
Books, 1985.

Cerebellum
See Brain
110

Cerebral cortex
See Brain

Character
General term in psychology used to describe behavior motivations and personality traits that make
each person an individual.

Character is most often used in reference to a set of
basic innate, developed, and acquired motivations that
shape an individual’s behavior. These qualities of an individual’s motivation are shaped during all stages of
childhood. By late adolescence, around age 17, the
traits that make up individual’s character are normally
integrated into a unique and distinctive whole. The term
character is sometimes used as roughly synonymous
with the term personality, although such usage does little to reduce the imprecision of either term. Some psychologists believe that differences in character among individuals largely reflect affective, or emotional, differences, that are the result of biochemical or other organic
variations. Many psychologists claim that character, to
some extent, is a function of experience. These psychologists, generally, believe that, as the early behavior of an
individual directed toward a primary, instinctive goal is
modified by environmental circumstances, the motivational system of the individual is also modified, and the
character of the individual is affected. There is some dispute among psychologists about whether, or to what extent, character may be controlled by conscious or rational decisions, and about whether, or to what extent, character may be dominated by unconscious or irrational
forces. At the same time, there is widespread agreement
among psychologists that, while much research remains
to be done to delineate the genetic, instinctive, organic,
cognitive, and other aspects of character, the development of a reasonably stable and harmonious character is
an essential part of a psychologically healthy existence.
Character education, a periodic but recurring theme
for schools to teach basic values and moral reasoning to
primary and secondary students, attracted renewed popularity in the 1990s. Character education initiatives have
developed at the local and state levels, but reflect a national trend. In 1995, President Bill Clinton and the U.S.
Congress declared October 16-22 “National Character
Counts Week.” In character education, teachers confront
students with moral dilemmas and ask them to formulate
and defend courses of action.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Jean Martin Charcot

Many prominent educators, politicians, and academics support character education. Opponents, including
the American Civil Liberties Union, object to character
education because it could lead to teaching religious beliefs. Some religious groups oppose it as well, since public school teachers must avoid teaching religion and
could make character a virtue that is anti-religious.
See also Personality development
Further Reading
Lockwood, Anne Turnbaugh. Character Education: Controversy and Consensus. Thousand Oaks, California: Corwin
Press, 1997.
Murphy, Madonna M. Character Education in America’s Blue
Ribbon Schools: Best Practices for Meeting the Challenge.
Lancaster, PA.: Technomic Publishing Co. Inc., 1998.

Jean Martin Charcot
1825-1893
French psychiatrist who specialized in the study of
hysteria, using hypnosis as a basis for treatment.

Jean Martin Charcot was born in Paris on Nov. 29,
1825, the son of a carriage maker. He took his medical
degree at the University of Paris in 1853 and was appointed professor of pathological anatomy there in 1860. In
1862 he was appointed senior physician at the
Salpêtrière, a hospital for the treatment of the mentally
ill. It became a center for psychiatric training and psychiatric care, for Charcot had a flair for theatrics in addition
to his reputation for sound science, and his lectures and
demonstrations attracted students from all over Europe.
Charcot’s contributions fall largely into three categories. First, he studied the etiology and cure of hysterical disorders (psychoneuroses). These disorders involve
what appear to be physiological disturbances such as
convulsions, paralyses, blindness, deafness, anesthesias,
and amnesias. However, there is no evidence of physiological abnormalities in psychoneuroses since the root of
the problem is psychological. In Charcot’s time hysteria
was thought to be a disorder found only in women (the
Greek word hystera means uterus), but his demonstrations were eventually influential in correcting this idea.
Charcot, however, continued to think of hysteria as a female disorder. Freud was later to associate hysterical
symptoms with sexual problems.
Charcot’s second area of contribution was the correlation of various behavioral symptoms with physiological
abnormalities of the nervous system. One of the major
problems for early psychiatry was that of determining
whether certain behavioral abnormalities had their origins

Jean Charcot (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

in psychological or in physiological disturbances and, if
physiological, where in the central nervous system the
abnormality might be located. Charcot became noted for
his ability to diagnose and locate the physiological disturbances of nervous system functioning.
Finally, Charcot made popular the use of hypnosis
as a part of diagnosis and therapy. Hypnosis, known at
the time as “mesmerism” (named for Franz Anton Mesmer), was regarded by the medical profession as charlatanism. Charcot found hypnotism useful in distinguishing true psychoneurotics from fakers and, like Mesmer,
found that hysterical symptoms could be relieved
through its use. In the hypnotic state the patient falls into
an apparent sleep. While in this condition, the patient
can sometimes recall events in his life which are not recalled in the waking state, and he is susceptible to the
suggestions of the therapist. In 1882 Charcot presented a
summary of his findings to the French Academy of Sciences, where they were favorably received. Scientific
psychiatry was thus well on its way to being accepted by
the medical profession. Charcot died on Aug. 16, 1893.
Further Reading
Guillian, Georges. J.M. Charcot, 1825-1893: his life-his work.
trans. 1959.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

111

Child abuse

Garrison, Fielding H. An introduction to the history of medicine. 1913. 4th ed. 1929.
Goetz, Christopher G. Charcot. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1995.

Child abuse
The act of harming children by neglect, physical
force, violence, sexual attack, or by inflicting psychological or emotional distress.

For much of history, children were considered the
property of parents. The family system was rarely, if
ever, intervened upon by society. If a mother or father
routinely abused their children, the abuse went unnoticed, or if noticed, merely ignored. It was largely considered a parent’s prerogative to do whatever he or she
wanted with their child.
Over the past several decades, however, the issue
and, seemingly, the prevalence of child abuse have become widespread. Psychologists question whether the
number of child abuse cases indicates increased occurrences of abuse or increased public awareness that encourages more reporting.
The first detailed account of the abuse of children
was published in 1962 by Harry Hemke in an article titled “The Battered Child Syndrome,” and since then
there have been numerous articles and books published
on this subject.
Over the years, child abuse has been categorized into
four types, although many psychologists dispute the usefulness of doing so. In compiling statistics on abuse, the

HOTLINES
The following organizations operate hotlines or
provide advice for family members where there are
problems related to physical or other abuse.
• Childhelp National Abuse Hotline
Telephone: toll-free (800) 422-4453
• National Coalition Against Domestic Violence
Telephone: (303) 839-1852
• National Council on Child Abuse and Family Violence
Telephone: toll-free (800) 222-2000
• National Victim Center
Telephone: toll-free (800) FYI-CALL [394-2255]
• National Runaway Switchboard
Telephone: toll-free (800) 621-4000

112

United States Department of Health and Human Services
(HHS) considers four categories of abuse: neglect, physical abuse, sexual abuse, and emotional maltreatment.
Obviously, these categories are not mutually exclusive
(that is, any given child can experience one or all, and all
types of abuse are forms of “emotional maltreatment”).
Statistically, it is difficult to find reliable national figures for cases of child abuse because each state keeps its
own records and has its own definitions of what constitutes abuse. Nonetheless, several organizations do compile national estimates of abuse and neglect. One of the
most commonly cited reports comes from Prevent Child
Abuse America, formerly known as the National Committee for the Prevention of Child Abuse headquartered in
Chicago, which conducts an annual national survey of the
50 states to acquire the most current data available.
An estimated 3,154,000 children were reported to
child protective service agencies as alleged victims of
child abuse or neglect in 1998, with about 1 million of
the reports confirmed. This means that 45 children out of
1,000 were reported as abused or neglected and 14 confirmed as abused or neglected in 1998. On average, three
children died each day in the United States from abuse or
neglect in 1997. While the nation’s overall crime rate fell
from 1993 to 1997 by 22 percent, reports of child abuse
and neglect increased by 8 percent with confirmed cases
increasing by 4 percent.
In 1998, 51 percent of the cases reported involved
neglect, 25 percent involved physical abuse, 10 percent
involved sexual abuse, 3 percent involved emotional
abuse and 11 percent related to other forms of child maltreatment. These figures represent substantiated cases,
meaning they were investigated by child protection services and found valid. Like any statistics on child abuse,
these must be considered incomplete, since not all cases
of abuse are reported.
Strong social and familial pressure may continue to
exist to avoid the issue when abuse is seen; however, requirements that professionals, such as doctors, teachers,
and therapists who work with children, report suspicions
of abuse have helped to make public health system intervention more widely accepted by society.
Still, newly arrived immigrants not yet acculturated
in the United States may, to their surprise, face social
service intervention for their cultural practices toward
children, deemed as child abuse in the United States.
Despite myths about its prevalence among lower-income populations, child abuse occurs throughout all strata of society. Physical abuse does appear more frequently
in poor families. Since middle-class and wealthy families are more likely to have their children treated by a
sympathetic personal physician who may be less likely

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Although these signs do not necessarily indicate that a child has been abused, they may help adults recognize that
something is wrong. The possibility of abuse should be investigated if a child shows a number of these symptoms, or
any of them to a marked degree:
Sexual Abuse
Being overly affectionate or knowledgeable in a sexual way inappropriate to the child’s age
Medical problems such as chronic itching, pain in the genitals, venereal diseases
Other extreme reactions, such as depression, self-mutilation, suicide attempts, running away, overdoses, anorexia
Personality changes such as becoming insecure or clinging
Regressing to younger behavior patterns such as thumb sucking or bringing out discarded cuddly toys
Sudden loss of appetite or compulsive eating
Being isolated or withdrawn
Inability to concentrate
Lack of trust or fear someone they know well, such as not wanting to be alone with a babysitter
Starting to wet again, day or night/nightmares
Become worried about clothing being removed
Suddenly drawing sexually explicit pictures
Trying to be “ultra-good” or perfect; overreacting to criticism
Physical Abuse
Unexplained recurrent injuries or burns
Improbable excuses or refusal to explain injuries
Wearing clothes to cover injuries, even in hot weather
Refusal to undress for gym
Bald patches
Chronic running away
Fear of medical help or examination
Self-destructive tendencies
Aggression towards others
Fear of physical contact—shrinking back if touched
Admitting that they are punished, but the punishment is excessive (such as a child being beaten every night to “make
him/her study”)
Fear of suspected abuser being contacted
Emotional Abuse
Physical, mental, and emotional development lags
Sudden speech disorders
Continual self-depreciation (“I’m stupid, ugly, worthless, etc.”)
Overreaction to mistakes
Extreme fear of any new situation
Inappropriate response to pain (“I deserve this”)
Neurotic behavior (rocking, hair twisting, self-mutilation)
Extremes of passivity or aggression
Neglect
Constant hunger
Constant tiredness
Emaciation

Poor personal hygiene
Poor state of clothing
Untreated medical problems

No social relationships
Compulsive scavenging
Destructive tendencies

A child may be subjected to a combination of different kinds of abuse. It is also possible that a child may show no
outward signs and hide what is happening from everyone.

Source: Kidscape, http://www.solnet.co.uk/kidscape/kids5.htm. Reprinted by permission.
Child abuse symptoms. (Stanley Publishing. Reproduced with permission.)

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

113

Child abuse

CHILD ABUSE: SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS

Child abuse

to diagnose and report injuries as child abuse, numbers
reported may be biased. Even with such reporting bias,
however, poverty seems strongly linked to abuse.

cially rejected than nonabused children. Less mature socially, abused children show difficulty in developing
trusting relationships with others.

Child abuse is also linked to parental use of alcohol
or other drugs. Several studies conducted during the
1970s confirmed that nearly 70 percent of substantiated
cases of abuse were related to alcohol.

Within the home, abused children are more disruptive and aggressive, frequently viewed by their parents as
defiant and noncompliant. Although observational measures confirm higher levels of disruptiveness, the number
and intensity of the problem behaviors seen by abusive
parents in their children may be partially a function of
the parents’ lower threshold of tolerance for children’s
noncompliance.

Anger most frequently triggers abuse by parents.
Abusive parents appear to have a lower threshold for
childish behaviors than nonabusive parents. The same
child cues triggers more upset in abusive parents than in
nonabusive parents. Most abusers are likely to have been
abused themselves and generally resort to violence to
cope with life stressors. Their abusive actions can be
seen as subconscious reactions to an array of stressful aspects of parenting, including disappointment in the gender or appearance of a child; a jealous reaction to the attention a child diverts from themselves; an attempt by
the abuser to hurt the other parent; or a reaction against
the child for failing to meet unrealistic expectations.
Pedophiles, or sexual abusers of children, occur
across all economic and cultural groups. Psychologically,
however, they share certain traits. Pedophiles often have
a history of being abused themselves, and abusing other
children seems to be triggered by increased life stressors,
such as marital problems, job layoffs, or abuse of drugs.
About 60 percent of the major physical injuries inflicted by caregivers occur in children ages birth to 4, the
age group most likely to be injured from abuse.
Typically, abused children show developmental delays by preschool age. It is unclear whether these delays
occur due to cumulative neurological damage or due to
inadequate stimulation and uncertainty in the child about
the learning environment and the absence of positive
parental interactions that would stimulate language and
motor processes. These delays, in concert with their parents’ higher-than-normal expectations for their children’s
self-care and self-control abilities, may provoke additional abuse. Abused preschoolers respond to peers and
other adults with more aggression and anger than do
non-abused children. A coercive cycle frequently develops where parents and children mutually control one another with threats of negative behavior.
School-aged children who are abused typically have
problems academically with poorer grades and performance on standardized achievement tests. Studies of
abused children’s intellectual performance find lower
scores in both verbal and performance (e.g., math, visual-spatial) areas. Abused children also toward distractibility and overactivity, making school a very difficult environment for them. With their peers, abused children are often more aggressive and more likely to be so114

As adolescents, abused children are more likely to be
in contact with the juvenile justice system than nonabused
children of comparable family constellation and income
level. Many of these children are labeled “ungovernable”
for committing offenses such as running away and truancy. A higher proportion of abused than nonabused delinquent youth are also involved in crimes of assault.
Follow-up studies on abused children in later adolescence show that in addition to having problems with
the law, they are also more likely to be substance abusers
or to have emotional disturbances such as depression.
Over the last several years, many consider the number of child abuse reportings to be at epidemic levels. As
reported in The CQ Researcher in 1993, “Almost
overnight, the national consciousness has been jolted into
confronting a disturbing possibility: Incest and child molestation may be far more common than previously
thought.” This increased reporting of sexual abuse has become a highly contentious topic among the psychological
community and in the media as well. Many find the reports a reflection of a sexually disturbed society, while
others believe that increased reporting is the result of sensationalist media accounts, celebrity pronouncements
about their own abuse, and over-zealous therapists who
too readily suggest to patients that episodes of sexual
abuse may lay at the heart of their other problems.
Another disturbing trend shows an increase in reports of ritual abuse, or satanic ritual abuse (SRA), in
which, it is alleged, children are systematically and repeatedly tortured by friends and family members in
elaborate Satanic ceremonies often involving human
sacrifice and ritual rape. Writing in The Journal of
Psychohistory in 1994, psychoanalyst David Lotto reported that at a recent convention of the American
Psychological Association, 800 therapists reported that
they were currently treating cases of ritual abuse. A
1988 study conducted by University of New Hampshire
researcher David Finkelhor found that as many as 13%
of child abuse allegations occurring at day care centers
involved ritual abuse. Another report followed the cases
of 24 ritual abuse trials and found that 23 people had

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Putting aside the current controversy over the prevalence of child sexual abuse in this country, no one disputes that sexual abuse does in fact occur and takes a
devastating toll on those abused. Sexually abused children may still be preoccupied in adulthood with events,
trying to understand and repair the damage. Frequently,
sexual abuse is a cited cause, for instance, of dissociative identity disorder. Sexual abuse, like severe physical and emotional abuse, can lead to other psychological
disorders as well, such as depression, mood disorders,
anxiety and panic disorders, and substance abuse.
Further Reading
“Child Sexual Abuse: Does the Nation Face an Epidemic Or a
Wave of Hysteria?” The CQ Researcher (15 January 1993).
Cockburn, Alexander. “Out of the Mouths of Babes: Child
Abuse and the Abuse of Adults.” The Nation (12 February
1990): 190.
Interview with National Committee for the Prevention of Child
Abuse, April 17, 1996.
Lotto, David. “On Witches and Witch Hunts: Ritual and Satanic
Cult Abuse.” Journal of Psychohistory (Spring 1994): 373.
Lowry, Richard. “How Many Battered Children?” National
Review (12 April 1993): 46.
Smith, Timothy. “You Don’t Have to Molest That Child.” Pamphlet published by the National Committee for the Prevention of Child Abuse, 1987.
Terry, Sara. “Children Are Falling Victim to a New Kind of
Sexual Offender: Other Children.” Rolling Stone (31 October 1991): 68.

LANDMARK PUBLICATIONS ON
CHILD DEVELOPMENT
1877 Charles Darwin’s Biographical Sketch of an Infant, observations on development of his eldest
child.
1880 G. Stanley Hall, the “father of child psychology
in America,” publishes The Contents of Children’s
Minds.
1914 John Broadus Watson publishes his most important work, Behavior—An Introduction to Comparative Psychology.
1926 Jean Piaget publishes The Child’s Conception of
the World, followed ten years later by The Orgin
of Intelligence in Children.
1934 Arnold Gesell publishes An Atlas of Infant Behavior, followed by Child in the Culture of Today
(1943), The Child from Five to Ten (1946), and
Child Development (1949).
1946 Benjamin Spock publishes The Common Sense
Book of Baby and Child Care.
1950 Erik Erikson publishes Childhood and Society.

opment of his eldest child. In this work, Darwin advanced
the hypothesis that each individual’s development from
birth to adulthood parallels or recapitulates the phylogenetic development of the human species as a whole (he had
made a similar observation about the development of the
fetus). Darwin’s ideas influenced the early study of child
development, also known as the child study movement.

The study of the sequential physical, cognitive,
emotional, and social changes a child undergoes
between birth and adolescence or adulthood.

In the United States, the most famous figure associated with Darwin’s evolutionary approach was G. Stanley Hall, who was labeled “the father of child psychology
in America.” The development of intelligence testing
around World War I directed attention to the intellectual
development of children, especially those considered either gifted or mentally retarded. As the century progressed, emphasis shifted from the study of children as a
source of scientific knowledge to a more altruistic endeavor aimed at improving their welfare. From Sigmund
Freud and Jean Piaget to Benjamin Spock and T.
Berry Brazelton, child development has been studied
and written about to better understand of children in order
to promote their well-being during the various stages of
childhood, and to help them mature into healthy adults.

The first detailed scientific study of child development
was probably Charles Darwin’s Biographical Sketch of
an Infant (1877), based on a log he had kept on the devel-

Freud developed many theories about the enormous
influence of childhood experiences on adult behavior
and also proposed a five-stage chronological model of
childhood psychosexual development. The oral stage

Further Information
Prevent Child Abuse America. 200 S. Michigan, 17th Floor,
Chicago, Illinois 60604-2404, (312) 663–3520.

Child development

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

115

Child development

been convicted of some kind of abuse. In looking at this
phenomenon critically, however, please note, as did an
FBI investigator at a 1991 conference of the American
Psychological Association, that in several years of intensive investigation by local and federal law enforcement, there has never been any evidence of a network
of satanic child abusers. Victims often report the existence of elaborate underground sacrificial altars where
their abuse occurred, and yet no trace has ever been
found of such a construction.

Childhood

(birth to 1.5 years), in which primary gratification is
through sucking, is followed by the anal stage (1.5 to 3
years), in which control of elimination is a primary concern. Next comes the phallic stage (3 to 7 years), during
which a child experiences and resolves the Oedipal crisis
and assumes his or her sexual identity. During the latency stage (ages 7 to 12) sexuality is dormant, and the primary love objects are people outside the home. With the
genital stage, which begins at age 12 and lasts into adulthood, instinctual sexual drives increase and parental attachments are dissolved.
Arnold Gesell was among the first psychologists to
undertake a thorough quantitative study of normal
human development from birth through adolescence.
Based on his work at Yale’s Child Development Clinic
and his own Institute, Gesell produced reports that had a
widespread influence on both parents and educators, and
created the Gesell Development Schedules, which are
still used today to assess motor and language development, adaptive behavior, and personal-social behavior in
children between four weeks and six years of age.
Probably the most famous theory of child development is the cognitive development model pioneered by
the Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget. Piaget divided child
development between birth and late adolescence into four
stages of increasingly complex and abstract thought, each
qualitatively different from the ones preceding it but still
dependent on them. The first, or sensorimotor, stage
(birth to approximately 2 years) is a time of nonverbal,
experimental basic learning when infants experience the
world primarily through their senses and gradually gain
mastery of their own bodies and external objects. The
preoperational stage (ages 2 to 6 years) involves the association of objects with words and the ability to solve
more complex problems, although the child’s focus at this
stage remains egocentric, a term that refers to the inability to consider things from another person’s perspective.
The third, or concrete operations, stage (6 to 11 years of
age) is a period during which categorizing activities and
the earliest logical operations occur. The fourth, or formal
operations, stage (ages 12 and higher) is characterized by
the gradual emergence of a mature ability to reason and
deal with abstract relationships.
Another well-known development theory structured in
stages is the one proposed by neo-Freudian Erik Erikson
in Childhood and Society (1950). While Erikson’s eightstage theory encompasses the entire human life span, much
of it is centered on childhood and adolescence. Each developmental stage in Erikson’s scheme is concerned with a
central conflict: trust versus mistrust in infancy; autonomy
versus doubt and shame in early childhood; initiative versus guilt in the preschool period; and industry versus inferiority during the early school years. The goals of the first
116

four stages create the foundation for the successful negotiation of the fifth stage, in which the adolescent must form a
stable identity and achieve a sense of self.
Lawrence Kohlberg’s work on the development of
moral reasoning approaches childhood from a different
perspective. After studying the different ways in which
children aged 7 through adolescence respond to moral
dilemmas, Kohlberg determined that there are universal
stages in moral development, which, like the cognitive
stages delineated by Piaget, differ from each other qualitatively. Children from the ages of 7 through about 10 act
on the preconventional level,which involves deferring to
adults and obeying rules based on the immediate
prospect of punishment or reward. At around age 10,
they progress to the conventional level, where their behavior is guided by the opinions of other people and the
desire to conform. During adolescence, children become
capable of postconventional morality, which entails the
ability to formulate abstract moral principles and act on
motives that transcend self-interest and even social
norms that conflict with one’s personal sense of justice.
In recent years, researchers in child development
have focused increasingly on the developmental patterns
and needs of minorities and women. Carol Gilligan,
Kohlberg’s colleague at Harvard University, found fault
with Kohlberg’s exclusive focus on white males in his
initial research, and in her own study, In a Different
Voice, Gilligan differentiates between male and female
moral development. In contrast to the male problemsolving approach to moral dilemmas based on an “ethic
of justice,” she describes a female “ethic of care” that is
based on empathy and involves the perception of moral
dilemmas in terms of conflicting responsibilities rather
than competing rights.
Further Reading
Bee, Helen L. The Developing Child. 5th ed. New York: Harper & Row, 1989.
Dworetzky, John. Introduction to Child Development. 5th ed.
Minneapolis: West Publishing Co., 1993.
Meinhold, Patricia. Child Psychology: Development and Behavior Analysis. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing
Co., 1993.
Owens, Karen. The World of the Child. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1987.
Papalia, Diane E. A Child’s World: Infancy through Adolescence. 5th ed. New York : McGraw-Hill, 1990.

Childhood
The period between birth and adulthood, during
which a person develops physically, intellectually,
and socially.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Childhood has been defined differently across the
ages. The Greek philosopher Plato (427?-347 B.C.) believed children were born with certain dispositions that
could be changed by their environment. Ancient Romans expressed great affection for their children in letters and on tombstones. During the Middle Ages, little
distinction was made between adults and children, who
worked from a very young age. The Renaissance saw the
beginning of the nuclear family in Europe, with an increased focus on childhood as a time for education and
training. John Locke (1632-1704), founder of the empirical school of philosophy, believed the child enters the
world as a tabula rasa or blank slate, and learns through
experience. Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778) took
the opposite tack, recommending that education should
follow nature since infants automatically prefer goodness. According to Sigmund Freud’s (1856-1939) psychoanalytic theory, children must pass through five psychosexual stages to achieve healthy adulthood. In contrast behaviorist John Watson (1878-1935) asserted
that, given a controlled environment, he could train a
child to be anything from doctor to thief. The emphasis
on environment, particularly the behavior of parents,
continued through the twentieth century until studies of
identical and fraternal twins, reared together or apart,
began to show the effect of genes on the journey from infancy to adulthood.

Prenatal development
The future adult begins not at birth but at conception, with the creation of a unique set of genes, half from
the mother, half from the father. This genetic blueprint is
called the genotype; its outward manifestation is the phenotype. Sometimes the phenotype is controlled directly
by the genotype, for example, eye color. More often, the
phenotype represents the interaction of the genotype and
the environment. It is even possible for the genotype to
be altered by the environment, as happens when men exposed to certain toxins suffer an increased risk of fathering children with genetic abnormalities.
Fewer than half of fertilized eggs, called zygotes,
survive the first two weeks during which the zygote
moves from the fallopian tube where it was fertilized to
the uterus where it is implanted. During the next six
weeks, the zygote differentiates into an embryo with internal organs, skin, nerves, and rudimentary limbs, fingers, and toes. In the final seven months of gestation, the
maturing skeletal, muscular, and nervous systems of
what is now called the fetus make movement possible.
Babies born at 28 weeks can survive, although often with
chronic health problems.

As each system undergoes its most rapid growth, it
is especially vulnerable to damage. In addition to genetic
abnormalities like Down syndrome, environmental
agents called teratogens can affect the fetus. These might
be maternal viruses such as rubella (German measles) or
chemicals such as nicotine, alcohol, and cocaine. Exposure to nicotine is linked to premature birth, low birth
weight, and cleft (malformed) palate and lips, while exposure to alcohol is linked to intellectual and behavioral
impairments. An inadequate maternal diet also puts the
fetus at risk, especially its brain and nervous system.
Prenatal teratogens can cause lifelong problems or even
death. The vast majority of babies, however, are born
healthy and normal.

Infancy
Newborns enter the world with many skills. In addition to a range of adaptive reflexes such as grasping,
sucking, and rooting (turning the head when the cheek is
touched), they are able to recognize their mothers’ face,
voice, and smell. Even more impressive, less than one
hour after birth, babies can imitate gestures such as
sticking out the tongue.

Physical development
The average healthy newborn is 7.5 pounds (3.4 kg)
and 20 inches (52 cm). It triples its weight and grows 10
to 12 inches (24-30 cm) its first year. By age two for
girls and two-and-a-half for boys, babies reach half their
adult height. Physical development is largely programmed by a genetically determined timetable called
maturation, which proceeds in predictable stages. For
healthy, well-nourished babies, progress is influenced
only slightly by environment, although they need opportunities to practice new skills.
The rate of physical growth slows after the second
year, not accelerating again until puberty. Both size and
rate of growth are genetically determined. In industrialized societies, puberty begins at 10 for girls and 12 for
boys, ages that have declined significantly over the past
150 years due to improved health and nutrition.

Intellectual development
The Swiss researcher Jean Piaget (1896-1980) pioneered the field of cognitive, or intellectual, development.
On the basis of his observations and ingenious questions,
he divided children’s thinking into four qualitatively distinct stages, moving from a direct sensory understanding
of the world, to the symbolic representation of objects, to
mental manipulation of objects, to logical thinking about
abstract concepts. Using new techniques such as changes

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

117

Child development

History of childhood

Childhood

in sucking and heart-rate, contemporary researchers have
found that, contrary to Piaget’s theory, even babies seem
to understand basic principles like object permanence,
the concept that objects continue to exist when hidden.
And although his middle stages of development have
been confirmed, far fewer people attain Piaget’s final
stage of logical reasoning than he predicted.
Other theories of learning attribute cognitive development not to the child’s own construction of knowledge, but to conditioning, the effect of environment on
the child. Conditioning works by encouraging behavior
through reinforcement or discouraging it through punishment. Social learning theory adds another mechanism, modeling, or learning by observation.
Intelligence
The measurement of intelligence, psychometrics,
began with Sir Francis Galton (1822-1911). Although
his measures of vision, reaction time, and grip strength
proved poor predictors of academic success, his model
of multiple indicators of intelligence has remained useful. IQ, or intelligence quotient, was originally a way to
identify children who needed remedial teaching. It compares mental age to chronological age, with average intelligence set at 100. Modern IQ tests are quite successful in predicting school success, but have been criticized
as culturally biased and limited in scope. IQ tends to remain the same when measured after the age of 4, an indication of its reliability.
Language learning
Perhaps the most crucial task of childhood is learning to communicate. Researchers have found that humans are attuned to language even before birth. Following a universal sequence, even deaf babies first cry, then
coo, then babble. Around eight months, babies begin to
copy the sounds and intonations of their native language
and speak their first words around one year of age. Vocabulary expands to over 200 words by age two, expressed in phrases such as “want cookie.” The speech of
three-year-olds reflects knowledge of plurals, past tense,
negatives, and questions, along with an increased vocabulary. Grammatical complexity and vocabulary continue
to expand throughout the school years. Children who are
spoken and read to more are linguistically advanced, although late talkers tend to catch up with early talkers in
the absence of other problems. Children who are read to
also have less trouble learning to read.

Personality development
Personality is what makes each person unique.
Where do individual differences come from and how sta118

ble are they from birth to adulthood? There is strong evidence for a biological component to personality dimensions like sociability, irritability, neuroticism, and conscientiousness, but environmental effects are also present. A baby’s innate sociability, for example, can be
squelched by a depressed mother, or a child’s innate irritability increased by a punitive teacher. In general, however, personality characteristics remain stable from infancy to adolescence.

Social development
Children grow up in a web of social relationships.
The first and most important is the bond between infant
and mother called attachment. Attachment is crucial because securely attached babies tend to become sociable,
confident, independent, and emotionally mature children. Adolescents who feel close to their parents also
enjoy more friendships and higher self-esteem. Another
predictor of social success is physical attractiveness.
Even infants prefer attractive faces, as do older children.
Boys who physically mature early are also more popular.
Not surprisingly, aggressive, disruptive, and uncooperative behaviors are predictors of social rejection. A cycle
of aggression and rejection often persists into adulthood.

Nature and nurture
The most contentious issue in the study of childhood is the relative importance of genetics (nature) and
environment (nurture). Purely environmental models
such as behaviorism have been contradicted by numerous studies showing a strong genetic influence for everything from intelligence to shyness to sexual orientation.
On the other hand, even clearly genetic traits interact
with environment. Tall children, for example, are often
treated as more mature. Intelligence is even more complicated. Twin studies show that between 50 and 60 percent of IQ is determined by genes. A child’s genetic intellectual potential, then, is actually a range that can be
maximized by a rich environment or minimized by a deprived one. In general, a child’s development follows a
genetic blueprint, but the final result is constrained by
the building materials of the environment.

Cultural differences
Most research on childhood is conducted in Western, industrial cultures. However, there is a growing
body of cross-cultural studies highlighting both similarities and differences in childhood around the world. Secure maternal attachment, for example, is less common
in Germany, a culture that values autonomy, than in
Japan, a culture that values community. Guatemalan

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Lindsay Evans
Further Reading
Bee, Helen. The Developing Child. Addison-Wesley Educational Publishers, Inc., 1997.
Casey, James. The History of the Family. Basil Blackwell Inc.,
1989.
Harris, Judith Rich. The Nurture Assumption. The Free Press,
1998.
Kagan, Jerome. The Nature of the Child. Basic Books, Inc.,
1984.
Kalat, James W. Introduction to Psychology, 5th ed.
Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1999.
“Linking Cleft Palates and Smoking Moms.” New York Times,
(11 April 2000): D8.
Monastersky, Richard. “A New Round of Research Rattles Old
Ideas of How Infants Interpret the World.” The Chronical
of Higher Education, (24 March 2000): A22.
Nairne, James S. The Adaptive Mind. Brooks/Cole Publishing
Company, 1997.
Rawson, Beryl, ed. Marriage, Divorce, and Children in Ancient Rome. Oxford University Press, Inc., 1996.
Wood, Samuel E. and Ellen Green Wood. The World of Psychology. Allyn and Bacon, 1996.
http://www.nichd.nih.gov/ Home page of the National Institute
of Child Health and Human Development. Last modified:
April 12, 2000.

Child psychology
Disciplines and theories concerned with the cognitive, psychological, physiological, and social/interpersonal aspects of human development.

Child psychologists study human development from
the earliest stages of life through adolescence and adulthood. These scientists focus on many areas of growth. In
the early years of life they include motor skills, percep-

tual analysis and inference, language and speech, social
behavior, and the emergence of basic emotions of fear,
sadness, anxiety, shame, and guilt.
The two important strategies for studying development include the longitudinal study in which a particular group of children is studied over a long period of
time, sometimes from infancy through adulthood. The
second method, which is more popular because it is less
expensive, is called the cross-sectional method. In this
strategy a group of children or adolescents at a particular
age are studied at that age. In order to compare different
ages, different samples would be studied but no group
would be studied over time.
The major question that developmental psychologists wish to understand is how the maturational forces
that are inevitable interact with experience to produce
the behaviors, skills, and motives that we observe. For
example, all children will develop an ability to speak
and understand language before they are three years of
age. However, in some cultural settings, children display
this skill soon after the first birthday, while in others it
might be delayed until the second or third birthday.
A related problem that puzzles child psychologists has
to do with the temperamental factors children inherit that
make a contribution to their individual personalities. Here,
too, the puzzle is to understand how these inherited temperamental biases and experience in the family and with
other children contribute to the traits the child develops.
Prior to Sigmund Freud’s writings which became
popular after the turn of the century, most Western explanations of the differences among children were attributed
to temperament or constitution. Freud changed this by
arguing that family experience was the more important
determinant of differences in children’s moods, emotions, and symptoms. Freud believed that those experiences in the family made the child vulnerable to conflicts
over hostility and sexuality. The intensity of the conflict
and the defenses the child learned to deal with those conflicts were the main determinant of the child’s personality. These view were very popular in the United States
for the period from 1930 to 1960. However, because of
the lack of strong scientific support for these theories,
loyalty to these ideas has eroded in a major way.
Erik Erikson substituted for Freud’s famous stages
on oral, anal, phallic, and genital a more humane set of
stages which emphasized the development of attachment relations in the first year of life and more generative and creative aspects of human nature, rather than the
more narcissistic and destructive.
Jean Piaget’s contribution was to motivate child
psychologists to pay more attention to the child’s intellectual and cognitive development.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

119

Child psychology

mothers always sleep with their babies, who fall asleep
without the rituals and problems typical among American babies. Attitudes toward school achievement also
vary. Japanese and Chinese mothers expect more from
their children than do American mothers, and their children outperform Americans. Some children spend their
first years in constant proximity to their mother, some in
day care centers. Some children watch younger siblings
or work in factories, some attend school. Some children
live in extended families, an increasing number live with
a single parent. Despite these differences, however, children everywhere show a zest for learning, play, and
friendship, and a drive to make sense out of their everchanging world.

Noam Chomsky

However, it is fair to say that at the present time there
is no overarching theory of child development. Child
psychologists are working on a series of problems that
cover all of the important areas of growth. It is hoped that
as these facts are gathered, brilliant theorists sometime in
the future will be able to synthesize this information into
a coherent theory that clarifies the child’s growth.
Jerome Kagan
Further Reading
Bee, Helen L. The Developing Child. 7th ed. New York:
HarperCollins College Publishers, 1995.
Gemelli, Ralph J. Normal Child and Adolescent Development.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press, 1996.
Kagan, Jerome. The Nature of the Child. New York: Basic
Books, 1994.
Roberts, Michael C. Handbook of Pediatric Psychology. 2nd
ed. New York: Guilford Press, 1995.
Sroufe, L. Alan, Robert G. Cooper, and Mary E. Marshall.
Child Development. New York: Random House, 1987.
Thomas, R. Murray. Comparing Theories of Child Development. 3rd ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1992.
Vasta, Ross, Marshall M. Haith, and Scott A. Miller. Child
Psychology: the Modern Science. New York: J. Wiley &
Sons, 1992.

Noam Chomsky
1928American linguist whose theory of transformational
or generative grammar has had a profound influence
on the fields of both linguistics and psychology.

Noam Chomsky was born in Philadelphia and educated at the University of Pennsylvania, where he received his B.A. (1949), M.A. (1951), and Ph.D. (1955).
In 1955, he was appointed to the faculty of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he has
served as professor of foreign languages and linguistics.
He has also taught courses and lectured at many universities throughout the world, including Oxford University.
Besides his work in the field of psycholinguistics,
Chomsky is also well-known as a leftist activist and social critic. He was an outspoken opponent of the Vietnam
War and has remained critical of media coverage of politics. Although Chomsky’s work is primarily of interest to
linguistics scholars, several of his theories have had popular applications in psychology.
Chomsky was a pioneer in the field of psycholinguistics, which, beginning in the 1950s, helped establish a
120

Noam Chomsky (UPI/Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with
permission.)

new relationship between linguistics and psychology.
While Chomsky argued that linguistics should be understood as a part of cognitive psychology, in his first book,
Syntactic Structures (1957), he opposed the traditional
learning theory basis of language acquisition. In doing
so, his expressed a view that differed from the behaviorist
view of the mind as a tabula rasa; his theories were also
diametrically opposed to the verbal learning theory of B.
F. Skinner, the foremost proponent of behaviorism. In
Chomsky’s view, certain aspects of linguistic knowledge
and ability are the product of a universal innate ability, or
“language acquisition device” (LAD), that enables each
normal child to construct a systematic grammar and generate phrases. This theory claims to account for the fact
that children acquire language skills more rapidly than
other abilities, usually mastering most of the basic rules
by the age of four. As evidence that an inherent ability exists to recognize underlying syntactical relationships
within a sentence, Chomsky cites the fact that children
readily understand transformations of a given sentence
into different forms—such as declarative and interrogative—and can easily transform sentences of their own.
Applying this principle to adult mastery of language,
Chomsky has devised the now-famous nonsense sentence, “Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.” Although
the sentence has no coherent meaning, English speakers

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Chomsky’s work has been highly controversial,
rekindling the age-old debate over whether language exists in the mind before experience. His theories also distinguish between language competence (knowledge of
rules and structure) and performance (how an individual
uses language in practice). Besides Syntactic Structures,
Chomsky’s books include Current Issues in Linguistics
Theory (1964), Aspects of the Theory of Syntax (1965),
Topics in the Theory of Generative Grammar (1966),
Cartesian Linguistics (1966), Language and Mind
(1968), Reflections on Language (1975), Logical Structure of Linguistic Theory (1975), and Knowledge of Language (1986).
Further Reading
D’Agostino, F. Chomsky’s System of Ideas. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1986.

Kenneth Bancroft Clark
1914American psychologist who studied the psychological effects of racial segregation.

Many psychologists have made history within their
profession; few, however, have had an impact on the
laws of a nation. Such was the case with Kenneth Bancroft Clark, whose work the Supreme Court cited in its
historic Brown v. Board of Education ruling. In the 1954
case, which overturned racial segregation in public
schools, the Court referred to a 1950 paper by Clark, and
described him as a “modern authority” on the psychological effects of segregation. His recognition by the highest
court in the land made Clark an instant celebrity, and on
the heels of this success, he set out to develop a prototype community action program for young people in
Harlem in 1962. However, political workings brought an
early end to his vision. Disillusioned by this experience,
Clark penned the most well-known of his many books,
Dark Ghetto: Dilemmas of Social Power (1965), which

would become an important text for sociologists studying inner-city life in America.

A world of opportunities in Harlem
Clark was born on July 24, 1914, in the Panama
Canal Zone. His father, Arthur Bancroft Clark, had come
from the West Indies and worked as a cargo superintendent for the United Fruit Company, a major employer in
Central America at that time. Clark’s mother, Miriam
Hanson Clark, was from Jamaica, and she and his father
disagreed over their children’s upbringing. Miriam wanted to move the family to the United States, where Kenneth and his younger sister Beulah would have greater
educational and career opportunities than they would in
Panama. But the father refused to go with them. He had
a good position at United Fruit, and under the harsh
racism and segregation that prevailed even in the northern United States at that time, he did not believe he could
obtain a similar job in America. Therefore Miriam and
her two children boarded a boat for New York harbor,
leaving the children’s father behind.
In New York City, Miriam got a job as a seamstress
in the New York garment district, and the family settled
in Harlem. At that time Harlem was a mixed community,
and besides other black families, the Clarks found themselves living alongside Irish and Jewish neighbors. This
experience undoubtedly had an effect on Clark’s later
commitment to integrated education. In school, he told
the New Yorker magazine in 1982, all students were expected to excel, regardless of skin color: “When I went
to the board in Mr. Ruprecht’s algebra class,” he recalled, “…I had to do those equations, and if I wasn’t
able to do them he wanted to find out why. He didn’t expect any less of me because I was black.”
In spite of this positive educational environment,
the rest of the world was filled with people who had low
expectations for black students. Hence when Clark finished junior high and had to choose a high school, counselors urged him to enroll in a vocational school. In spite
of his strong academic record, he was black, and therefore he could only hope to gain employment in a limited
range of jobs, all of which involved working with one’s
hands. That, at least, was the logic, and to many people it
would have made sense—but not to Miriam Clark. When
her son told her what the school counselor had suggested, she went to the counselor’s office and informed him
that she had not struggled to bring her family from Panama so that her son could become a factory worker.
She enrolled Kenneth in George Washington High
School, an academic school where he performed well in
all subjects. He was particularly interested in economics,
and had begun to consider becoming an economist. But

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

121

Kenneth Bancroft Clark

regard it as still more nonsensical if the syntax, as well as
the meaning, is deprived of underlying logic, as in “Ideas
furiously green colorless sleep.” (The same idea underlies
Lewis Carroll’s well-known poem “Jabberwocky” from
his Alice in Wonderland.) Chomsky’s approach is also referred to as “generative” because of the idea that rules
generate the seemingly infinite variety of orders and sentences existing in all languages. Chomsky argues that the
underlying logic, or deep structure, of all languages is the
same and that human mastery of it is genetically determined, not learned. Those aspects of language that humans have to study are termed surface structures.

Kenneth Bancroft Clark

when he earned an award for his outstanding performance in the class, the teacher refused to give it to him.
This example of racial discrimination, Clark’s first clearcut experience with it, would have enormous impact on
his life. Because of it, he decided not to study economics, and it may have led to his lifelong interest in the psychology of racism.

Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy.
But his work with Bunche and Myrdal would not prove
to be the most significant collaboration of Clark’s career;
his most important partner was closer to home, in the
person of his wife Mamie.

Meetings with remarkable men—and a
woman

In 1946, the Clarks established the Northside Testing and Consultation Center in Harlem. In time this
would become the Northside Center for Child Development, and the name change reflected a shift of emphasis.
In the course of their research and therapy for troubled
black youngsters, the Clarks had discovered evidence
that racism helped to create a pervasive negative selfimage. For instance, when given a choice between a
brown doll and a white one and told “Give me the doll
that looks bad,” black children would usually choose the
brown doll; told to point out “the doll that is a nice
color,” they would select the white one.

Clark had not yet decided to become a psychologist;
in fact, when he entered Washington, D.C.’s Howard
University in 1931, he planned to study medicine. But in
his sophomore year, he took a psychology course taught
by Professor Frances Sumner. Sumner’s method of psychological study, Clark recalled in his 1982 New Yorker
interview, offered “the promise of…systematic understanding of the complexities of human behavior and
human interaction”—including insight into “the seemingly intractable nature of racism.” Intrigued, Clark
switched his major to psychology. Another professor at
Howard who had an influence on Clark was Ralph
Bunche. Bunche, who would later gain fame as a diplomat and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1950, taught
Clark in several political science courses.
After graduating in 1935, Clark went on to obtain
his M.S. in psychology the next year, then accepted a
teaching position at Howard. But Sumner, recognizing
his great potential, encouraged him to obtain his doctorate at Columbia University. Therefore Clark returned to
New York City and enrolled in the doctoral program at
Columbia. On April 14, 1938, he married Mamie Phipps,
a psychology student from Arkansas whom he had met at
Howard. The couple would eventually have two children,
Kate Miriam and Hilton. Clark, the first black doctoral
candidate in Columbia’s psychology program, earned his
Ph.D. degree in 1940.
For a short period of time, Clark taught at Hampton
Institute in Virginia, an old and highly conservative black
college. But Clark had strong differences of opinion with
the administration at Hampton, and resigned after one
semester. From 1941 to 1942, Clark worked for the federal government’s Office of War Information, studying
morale conditions of America’s black population as the
country entered World War II. In 1942, he accepted a position as an instructor at City College of New York
(CCNY), and in 1949 became an assistant professor.
Clark and his mentor Bunche had worked together
on research for renowned Swedish economist Gunnar
Myrdal, another future Nobel laureate. Myrdal’s study of
conditions among African Americans in the United
States would be published in 1944 as An American
122

The rising young social scientist

The Clarks had been conducting such studies for
some time. Between 1939 and 1950, they published five
articles on the effect that segregated schooling had on
kindergartners in Washington, D.C. For the Midcentury
White House Conference on Children and Youth in 1950,
Clark wrote another article that summed up his and
Mamie’s research, as well as the work of other social scientists who had studied the psychological effects of segregation.
Up to that time, the law of the land regarding segregated schooling had been governed by the Supreme
Court’s decision in Plessy v. Ferguson (1896). In that
case, the Court held that the establishment of separate
schools for blacks and whites—as long as the schools
were of equal quality—did not violate the concept of
equal protection under the law guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution. In practice, of
course, schools for blacks were certainly separate, but
rarely equal. Furthermore, Clark’s research had shown
that even if they were equal in quality, the very fact of
enforced separation created an inherent inequity.
When the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) began to challenge institutionalized segregation in the nation’s courts, the organization turned to Clark. In three of the four cases that
led to the Supreme Court’s review of the segregation
issue, Clark testified as an expert witness. When the case
went before the Supreme Court, the NAACP presented a
special paper, prepared by Clark and others, called “The
Effects of Segregation and the Consequences of Desegregation: A Social Science Statement.” It was the first
time in American legal history that a brief prepared by a
social scientist, illustrating the human consequences of a

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In its ruling on Brown v. Board of Education, the
historic 1954 case which struck down institutionalized
segregation, the Court cited Clark’s work as valuable evidence. More important, it reiterated the theme he had
presented as the evidence mounted from his studies:
“Separate educational facilities are inherently unequal.”

Highs and lows, disappointment and hope
On the heels of the May 17, 1954, Supreme Court
decision, Clark became a celebrity in the community of
social scientists. He was feted and honored at universities around the country, bestowed with honorary degrees
and described in glowing terms by his colleagues. A generation later, three young graduate students writing in the
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science would sum up the
extent of his reputation: “We approached our telephone
interview with Dr. Kenneth Clark with awe. After all, his
contribution to U.S. history had enabled our own education to occur in an integrated society.”
For the next decade, Clark went from triumph to triumph. In 1960, CCNY made him a full professor, and he
thus became the first African American awarded a permanent position at any of New York’s city colleges. The
next year, the NAACP gave him its Spingarn Award for
his contributions to race relations. With the support of
the federal government, Clark in June 1962 established
Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited, or HARYOU.
With HARYOU, he planned to reorganize the schools of
Harlem by integrating classes, enforcing higher standards on teachers, and involving members of the community—especially parents—in the education of its
young people. It was to be the prototype for the sort of
community-action programs which come into increasing
prominence in the 1980s and 1990s.
HARYOU outlined these principles in a 620-page report, which took two years to prepare; unfortunately, as
Clark would later say in his New Yorker profile, “As it
turned out, all we did at HARYOU was to produce a document.” Clark’s dream for the organization would never
become a reality, and his opposition came not from white
racists but from a black politician. The federal government in May 1964 allocated $110 million for the program, and arranged a merger of HARYOU with Associated Community Teams (ACT), a group in which Democratic Congressman Adam Clayton Powell had a hand.
Clark and Powell disagreed over who should lead the program, and when Clark accused Powell of trying to take it
over for political purposes, Powell claimed that Clark was
profiting financially from the program. In disgust, Clark
resigned from the organization on July 31, 1964.

As a result of his disappointing experience, Clark
wrote Dark Ghetto, which would become the most wellknown of his more than 16 books. In 1967 he formed the
Metropolitan Applied Research Center, or MARC, with
a group of other social scientists. Three years later, in
1970, MARC attempted to resurrect a program similar to
that of HARYOU, this time in Washington, D.C. Yet
again, however, power politics defeated Clark’s dream.
Teachers’ unions rejected Clark’s attempts to hold educators to higher standards, and the city school board chairman disagreed with Clark’s central idea that black children should be expected to do as well in school as their
white counterparts. To add to his misfortunes, in the late
1960s, Clark was subjected to scorn by black militants
who rejected his integrationist approach.
Just as the decade leading up to the HARYOU debacle had been characterized by triumphs, the decade that
followed had proven to be one of disappointments. In
1975, Clark retired from teaching and with his wife and
children founded Clark, Phipps, Clark & Harris, Inc., a
consulting firm that assisted corporations such as AT&T
in setting up affirmative action programs. Clark continued with this work after he lost his most important partner, Mamie, when she died in 1983.
Meanwhile, the idealist who had dreamed of fully
integrated schools watched with disappointment as society became more segregated. This time the segregation
was not a matter of law, but of choice, and the growing
gap between the performance of black students and those
in the mainstream only threatened to increase the division. But Clark managed to retain his hope that society
could make a change. The key, as he wrote in Newsweek
in 1993, was to teach genuine respect for humankind:
“We have not yet made education a process whereby students are taught to respect the inalienable dignity of
other human beings…. [But] by encouraging and rewarding empathetic behavior in all of our children….
[w]e will be helping them to understand the commonality of being human. We will be educating them.”
See also Prejudice and discrimination
Judson Knight
Further Reading
Bigelow, Barbara Carlisle, ed. Contemporary Black Biography,
Volume 5. Detroit: Gale, 1994, pp. 51-55.
Contemporary Authors, Volume 36. Detroit: Gale, 1978.
Guthrie, Robert V. Even the Rat Was White, Harper’s (1976):
150-1
Hentoff, N. “Profiles,” New Yorker, (August 23, 1982): 37-40.
Keppel, Ben. The Work of Democracy: Ralph Bunche, Kenneth
B. Clark, Lorraine Hansberry, and the Cultural Politics of
Race. Harvard University Press, 1995.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

123

Kenneth Bancroft Clark

law in terms of its social and psychological impact, had
been presented before the Supreme Court.

Classical conditioning

Latting, Jean Kantambu et al., “Dr. Kenneth Bancroft Clark: A
Biography,” Journal of Applied Behavioral Sciences,
(September 1991): 263-64.
“Light in the Ghetto,” Newsweek, (May 31, 1965): 78.
Markowitz, Gerald and Rosner, David. Children, Race, and
Power: Kenneth and Mamie Clark’s Northside Center.
University Press of Virginia, 1996.
McGuire, William and Wheeler, Leslie. American Social Leaders. ABC-Clio, 1993, pp. 99-100.
Sammons, Vivian Ovelton. Blacks in Science and Medicine.
Hemisphere Publishing, 1990.
“10 Forces Behind U.S. Education,” Scholastic Update, (February 3, 1984): 9.
Willie, C.V., “Five Black Scholars,” Change, (September
1983): 27.
Young, Margaret. Black American Leaders. Watts, 1969, pp.
28-30.

Classical conditioning
The process of closely associating a neutral stimulus with one that evokes a reflexive response so
that eventually the neutral stimulus alone will
evoke the same response.

Classical conditioning is an important concept in the
school of psychology known as behaviorism, and it
forms the basis for some of the techniques used in behavior therapy.
Classical conditioning was pioneered by the Russian
physiologist Ivan Pavlov (1849-1936) in the 1890s in
the course of experiments on the digestive systems of
dogs (work which won him the Nobel Prize in 1904).
Noticing that the dogs salivated at the mere sight of the
person who fed them, Pavlov formulated a theory about
the relationship between stimuli and responses that he
believed could be applied to humans as well as to other
animals. He called the dogs’ salivation in response to the
actual taste and smell of meat an unconditioned response because it occurred through a natural reflex without any prior training (the meat itself was referred to as
an unconditioned stimulus). A normally neutral act, such
as the appearance of a lab assistant in a white coat or the
ringing of a bell, could become associated with the appearance of food, thus producing salivation as a conditioned response (in response to a conditioned
stimulus).Pavlov believed that the conditioned reflex had
a physiological basis in the creation of new pathways in
the cortex of the brain by the conditioning process. In
further research early in the 20th century, Pavlov found
that in order for the conditioned response to be maintained, it had to be paired periodically with the unconditioned stimulus or the learned association would be for124

gotten (a process known as extinction). However, it
could quickly be relearned if necessary.
In humans, classical conditioning can account for
such complex phenomena as a person’s emotional reaction to a particular song or perfume based on a past experience with which it is associated. Classical (sometimes
called Pavlovian) conditioning is also the basis for many
different types of fears or phobias, which can occur
through a process called stimulus generalization (a child
who has a bad experience with a particular dog may learn
to fear all dogs). In addition to causing fears, however,
classical conditioning can also help eliminate them
through a variety of therapeutic techniques. One is systematic desensitization, in which an anxiety-producing
stimulus is deliberately associated with a positive response, usually relaxation produced through such techniques as deep breathing and progressive muscle relaxation. The opposite result (making a desirable stimulus
unpleasant) is obtained through aversion therapy, in
which a behavior that a person wants to discontinue—
often an addiction, such as alcoholism—is paired with an
unpleasant stimulus, such as a nausea-producing drug.
Further Reading
Gormezano, Isidore, William F. Prokasy, and Richard F.
Thompson. Classical Conditioning. 3rd ed. Hillsdale, NJ:
L. Erlbaum, 1987.
Lieberman, David A. Learning: Behavior and Cognition. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1990.
Mackintosh, N.J. Conditioning and Associative Learning. New
York: Oxford University, 1983.

Client-centered therapy
An approach to counseling and psychotherapy that
places much of the responsibility for the treatment
process on the patient, with the therapist taking a
non-directive role.

Developed in the 1930s by the American psychologist Carl Rogers, client-centered therapy—also known
as non-directive or Rogerian therapy—departed from the
typically formal, detached role of the therapist common
to psychoanalysis and other forms of treatment. Rogers
believed that therapy should take place in the supportive
environment created by a close personal relationship
between client and therapist. Rogers’s introduction of the
term “client” rather than “patient” expresses his rejection
of the traditionally authoritarian relationship between
therapist and client and his view of them as equals. The
client determines the general direction of therapy, while
the therapist seeks to increase the client’s insightful selfunderstanding through informal clarifying questions.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Unconditional positive regard means that the therapist accepts the client totally for who he or she is without
evaluating or censoring, and without disapproving of
particular feelings, actions, or characteristics. The therapist communicates this attitude to the client by a willingness to listen without interrupting, judging, or giving advice. This creates a nonthreatening context in which the
client feels free to explore and share painful, hostile, defensive, or abnormal feelings without worrying about
personal rejection by the therapist.
The third necessary component of a therapist’s attitude is empathy (“accurate empathetic understanding”).
The therapist tries to appreciate the client’s situation
from the client’s point of view, showing an emotional
understanding of and sensitivity to the client’s feelings
throughout the therapy session. In other systems of therapy, empathy with the client would be considered a preliminary step enabling the therapeutic work to proceed,
but in client-centered therapy, it actually constitutes a
major portion of the therapeutic work itself. A primary
way of conveying this empathy is by active listening that
shows careful and perceptive attention to what the client
is saying. In addition to standard techniques, such as eye
contact, that are common to any good listener, clientcentered therapists employ a special method called reflection, which consists of paraphrasing and/or summarizing what a client has just said. This technique shows
that the therapist is listening carefully and accurately and
gives clients an added opportunity to examine their own
thoughts and feelings as they hear them repeated by another person. Generally, clients respond by elaborating
further on the thoughts they have just expressed.
Two primary goals of client-centered therapy are increased self-esteem and greater openness to experience.
Some of the related changes that it seeks to foster in
clients include increased correspondence between the
client’s idealized and actual selves; better self-understanding; decreases in defensiveness, guilt, and insecuri-

CLIENT-CENTERED THERAPY
QUALITIES OF THE THERAPIST

Congruence: therapist’s openness to the client
Unconditional positive regard: therapist accepts the
client without judgement
Empathy: therapist tries to convey an appreciation
and understanding of the client’s point of view
GOALS OF THE THERAPY

Increase self-esteem
Expand openness to life experiences.

ty; more positive and comfortable relationships with others; and an increased capacity to experience and express
feelings at the moment they occur. Beginning in the
1960s, client-centered therapy became allied with the
human potential movement. Rogers adopted terms
such as “person-centered approach” and “way of being”
and began to focus on personal growth and self-actualization. He also pioneered the use of encounter groups,
adapting the sensitivity training (T-group) methods developed by Kurt Lewin (1890-1947) and other researchers at the National Training Laboratories in 1950s.
While client-centered therapy is considered one of
the major therapeutic approaches, along with psychoanalytic and cognitive-behavioral therapy, Rogers’s influence is felt in schools of therapy other than his own, and
the concepts and methods he developed are drawn on in
an eclectic fashion by many different types of counselors
and therapists.
Further Reading
Rogers, Carl. Client-Centered Therapy. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1951.
———. On Becoming a Person. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1961.
———. A Way of Being. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1980.

Clinical psychology
The application of psychological principles to diagnosing and treating persons with emotional and
behavioral problems.

Clinical psychologists apply research findings in the
fields of mental and physical health to explain dysfunctional behavior in terms of normal processes. The prob-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

125

Clinical psychology

Rogers believed that the most important factor in
successful therapy was not the therapist’s skill or training, but rather his or her attitude. Three interrelated attitudes on the part of the therapist are central to the success of client-centered therapy: congruence, unconditional positive regard, and empathy. Congruence refers
to the therapist’s openness and genuineness—the willingness to relate to clients without hiding behind a professional facade. Therapists who function in this way
have all their feelings available to them in therapy sessions and may share significant ones with their clients.
However, congruence does not mean that therapists disclose their own personal problems to clients in therapy
sessions or shift the focus of therapy to themselves in
any other way.

Clinical psychology

lems they address are diverse and include mental illness,
mental retardation, marital and family issues, criminal
behavior, and chemical dependency. The clinical psychologist may also address less serious problems of adjustment similar to those encountered by the counseling
psychologist.
Approximately one-third of the psychologists working in the United States today are clinical psychologists.
A number of clinical psychologists are in private practice, either alone or in group practice with other mental
health professionals. Others may practice in a variety of
settings, including community mental-health centers,
university medical schools, social work departments,
centers for the mentally and physically handicapped,
prisons, state institutions and hospitals, juvenile courts,
and probation offices. Clinical psychologists use psychological assessment and other means to diagnose psychological disorders and may apply psychotherapy to treat
clients individually or in groups. In the United States,
they are governed by a code of professional practice
drawn up by the American Psychological Association.
Individuals consult clinical psychologists for treatment when their behaviors or attitudes are harmful to
themselves or others. Many different treatment types and
methods are employed by psychologists, depending on
the setting in which they work and their theoretical orientation. The major types of therapy include psychodynamic therapies, based on uncovering unconscious
processes and motivations, of which the most well
known is Freudian psychoanalysis; phenomenological,
or humanistic, therapies (including the Rogerian and
Gestalt methods) which view psychotherapy as an encounter between equals, abandoning the traditional doctor-patient relationship; and behavior-oriented therapies
geared toward helping clients see their problems as
learned behaviors that can be modified without looking
for unconscious motivations or hidden meanings. These
therapies, derived from the work of Ivan Pavlov and
B.F. Skinner, include methods such as behavior modification and cognitive-behavior therapy, which may be
used to alter not only overt behavior but also the thought
patterns that drive it.
The work of the clinical psychologist is often compared with that of the psychiatrist, and although there is
overlap in what these professionals do, there are also
specific distinctions between them. As of 1996, clinical
psychologists cannot prescribe drugs to treat psychological disorders, and must work in conjunction with a psychiatrist or other M.D. who is authorized to administer
controlled substances. However, a movement is underway for prescription privileges for psychologists. The
clinical psychologist has extensive training in research
methods and in techniques for diagnosing, treating, and
126

preventing various disorders. Most psychologists earn a
Ph.D. degree in the field, which requires completion of a
four- to six-year program offered by a university psychology department. The course of study includes a
broad overview of the field (including courses in such
areas as statistics, personality theory, and psychotherapy), as well as specialization in a particular subfield and
completion of a practicum, internship, and dissertation.
A new training program for psychologists was developed and introduced at the University of Illinois,
which offered the first Psychology Doctorate (Psy.D.) in
1968. This degree program is geared exclusively toward
the training of clinicians rather than researchers. It
stresses course work in applied methods of assessment
and intervention and eliminates the dissertation requirement. The number of Psy.D. programs in the United
States has grown since 1968, with some programs offered at universities and others at independent, “freestanding” professional schools of psychology.
Assessment plays a prominent role among the functions of clinical psychology. The term “clinical psychology” itself was first used at the end of the nineteenth
century in connection with the testing of mentally retarded and physically handicapped children. The discipline
soon expanded with the growing interest in the application of assessment techniques to the general population
following Robert Yerkes’s revision of the Stanford Binet
Intelligence scales in 1915, creating a widely used point
scale for the measurement of human mental ability.
Clinical psychologists must be familiar with a variety of
techniques of assessing patients through interviews, observation, tests, and various forms of play. Assessment
may be used to compare an individual with others in a
reliable way using standardized norms; determine the
type and circumstances of symptomatic behaviors; understand how a person functions in a given area (cognition, social skills, emotion); or match a patient to a particular diagnostic category for further treatment.
While the clinical psychologist does not specialize in
research, the two disciplines often overlap. With their varied experiences, clinicians are qualified to participate in research on, for example, cost effectiveness in health care,
design of facilities, doctor-patient communication, or studies of various treatment methods. Clinical psychologists
routinely contribute to the training of mental health professionals and those in other areas of health care, serving on
the faculties of universities and independent institutes of
psychology, where they teach courses, supervise
practicums and internships, and oversee dissertation research. They also carry out administrative appointments
which call for them to assist in the planning and implementation of health care services and are represented in international groups such as the World Health Organization.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Bernstein, Douglas A. Introduction to Clinical Psychology.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980.
Lilienfeld, Scott O. Seeing Both Sides: Classic Controversies
in Abnormal Psychology. Pacific Grove, CA:
Brooks/Cole, 1995.
Nietzel, Michael T. Introduction to Clinical Psychology. 3rd
ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991.

Cliques
A group of people who identify with each other
and interact frequently.

The term clique has two levels of significance. In its
neutral usage by social researchers, it denotes a group of
people who interact with each other more intensively
than with other peers in the same setting. In its more
popular form it has negative connotations. It is used to
describe an adolescent social group that excludes others
on the basis of superficial differences, exercising greater
than average amount of peer pressure upon its members. The numerous terms teenagers use to describe
themselves and others—such as jocks, druggies, populars, brains, nerds, normals, rappers, preps, stoners, rockers, punks (punx), freaks (phreaks), and skaters—exemplify both levels of meaning in the word “clique.” These
terms both accurately refer to the activities or qualities
the group members share as well as to the exclusiveness
of the groups.
A clique consists of a particular group of people
within a particular location. Cliques are characterized by
a pattern of relationships in which each member is either
directly or indirectly connected with every other member, and in each pair relationship the members exchange
social overtures (phone calls, get-togethers, etc.) on a
fairly equal basis. Joining cliques, having the desire to
join a particular clique, and being excluded from cliques
are considered a normal part of adolescent development.
Joining cliques helps children to develop, identify, and
regulate social interaction. Generally children begin to
be more aware of differences and form cliques in late elementary school, between the ages of 8 and 10 years old.
As they begin to separate emotionally from their parents,
young adolescents’ identification with their peers is
greatly exaggerated between ages 10 and 12 years old,
when a child’s clique may change on a daily basis.
The issue of belonging is extremely important during middle school and high school, and membership in
cliques can have a strong effect on the adolescent’s sense
of self-worth. During high school, cliques become more
consistent, though their composition may change. Re-

search shows that the way an adolescent or teen behaves
is better predicted by the behavior of cliques in which he
is a part than by the behavior of individual friends.
Most cliques are fairly complex and have a mixture
of positive and negative qualities. Cliques may be judged
according to the degree to which they exert positive or
negative peer pressure, accept diversity among members,
and appreciate individuality. Even if a group exerts positive peer pressure, it may also be exerting negative peer
pressure by being exclusive on the basis of race, class,
religion, sexual orientation, or ethnicity.
Further Reading
Peck, Lee A. Coping with Cliques. New York: Rosen Publishing Group, 1992.
Sciacca, Fran. Cliques and Clones: Facing Peer Pressure.
Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan, 1992.
Shellenberger, Susie. Lockers, Lunch Lines, Chemistry, and
Cliques. Minneapolis, MN: Bethany House Publishers,
1995.

Cocaine
See Drugs/Drug abuse

Codependence
A term used to describe a person who is intimately
involved with a person who is abusing or addicted
to alcohol or another substance.

The concept of codependence was first developed in
relation to alcohol and other substance abuse addictions.
The alcoholic or drug abuser was the dependent, and the
person involved with the dependent person in any intimate way (spouse, lover, child, sibling, etc.) was the
codependent. The definition of the term has been expanded to include anyone showing an extreme degree of certain personality traits: denial, silent or even cheerful tolerance of unreasonable behavior from others, rigid loyalty to family rules, a need to control others, finding identity through relationships with others, a lack of personal
boundaries, and low self-esteem. Some consider it a progressive disease, one which gets worse without treatment
until the codependent becomes unable to function successfully in the world. Progressive codependence can
lead to depression, isolation, self-destructive behavior
(such as bulimia, anorexia, self-mutilation) or even suicide. There is a large self-help movement to help codependents take charge of themselves and heal their lives.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

127

Codependence

Further Reading

Cognitive behavior therapy

There is some criticism of the “codependence movement” by those who feel it is only a fad that encourages labeling and a weak, dependent, victim mentality that obscures more important underlying truths of oppression.
Many critics claim the definition of codependence is too
vague and the list of symptoms too long and broad to be
meaningful. These critics believe that all families fit the
“dysfunctional” label; by diagnosing a person as “codependent,” all responsibility for the individual’s dissatisfaction, shortcomings, and failures comes to rest on the individual and his or her family. Larger issues of cultural, societal, or institutional responsibility are ignored. However,
some proponents of the codependence definition are
widening their perspective to look at how society as a
whole, as well as separate institutions within society, function in an addictive, dysfunctional, or codependent way.
Further Reading
Beattie, Melody. Codependent No More: How to Stop Controlling Others and Start Caring for Yourself. San Francisco:
Hazelden/HarperCollins, 1987.
Johnson, Sonia. Wildfire: Igniting the She/Volution. Albuquerque, NM: Wildfire Books, 1989.
Katz, Dr. Stan J., and Eimee E. Liu. The Codependency Conspiracy: How to Break the Recovery Habit and Take
Charge of Your Life. New York: Warner Books, 1991.

Cognitive behavior therapy
A therapeutic approach based on the principle that
maladaptive moods and behavior can be changed
by replacing distorted or inappropriate ways of
thinking with thought patterns that are healthier
and more realistic.

Cognitive therapy is an approach to psychotherapy that uses thought patterns to change moods and behaviors. Pioneers in the development of cognitive behavior therapy include Albert Ellis (1929-), who developed rational-emotive therapy (RET) in the 1950s, and
Aaron Beck (1921-), whose cognitive therapy has been
widely used for depression and anxiety. Cognitive behavior therapy has become increasingly popular since
the 1970s. Growing numbers of therapists have come to
believe that their patients’ cognitive processes play an
important role in determining the effectiveness of treatment. Currently, almost 70% of the members of the Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy
identify themselves as cognitive behaviorists.
Like behavior therapy, cognitive behavior therapy
tends to be short-term (often between 10 and 20 sessions), and it focuses on the client’s present situation in
contrast to the emphasis on past history that is a promi128

nent feature of Freudian psychoanalysis and other psychodynamically oriented therapies. The therapeutic
process begins with identification of distorted perceptions and thought patterns that are causing or contributing to the client’s problems, often through detailed
record keeping by the client. Some self-defeating ways
of thinking identified by Aaron Beck include all-or-nothing thinking; magnifying or minimizing the importance
of an event; overgeneralization (drawing extensive conclusions from a single event); personalization (taking
things too personally); selective abstraction (giving disproportionate weight to negative events); arbitrary inference (drawing illogical conclusions from an event); and
automatic thoughts (habitual negative, scolding thoughts
such as “You can’t do anything right”).
Once negative ways of thinking have been identified,
the therapist helps the client work on replacing them with
more adaptive ones. This process involves a repertoire of
techniques, including self-evaluation, positive self-talk,
control of negative thoughts and feelings, and accurate
assessment of both external situations and of the client’s
own emotional state. Clients practice these techniques
alone, with the therapist, and also, wherever possible, in
the actual settings in which stressful situations occur (in
vivo), gradually building up confidence in their ability to
cope with difficult situations successfully by breaking out
of dysfunctional patterns of response.
Today cognitive behavior therapy is widely used
with children and adolescents, especially for disorders
involving anxiety, depression, or problems with social
skills. Like adult clients, children undergoing cognitive
behavior therapy are made aware of distorted perceptions and errors in logic that are responsible for inaccurate or unrealistic views of the world around them. The
therapist then works to change erroneous beliefs and perceptions by instruction, modeling, and giving the child a
chance to rehearse new attitudes and responses and practice them in real-life situations. Cognitive behavior therapy has been effective in treating a variety of complaints,
ranging from minor problems and developmental difficulties to severe disorders that are incurable but can be
made somewhat more manageable. It is used either alone
or together with other therapies and/or medication as
part of an overall treatment plan.
Cognitive behavioral therapy has worked especially
well, often in combination with medication, for children
and adolescents suffering from depression. It can help
free depressed children from the pervasive feelings of
helplessness and hopelessness that are supported by selfdefeating beliefs. Children in treatment are assigned to
monitor their thoughts, and the therapist points out ways
that these thoughts (such as “nothing is any fun” or “I
never do anything right”) misrepresent or distort reality.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Cognitive behavioral therapy is also used for children with conduct disorder, which is characterized by
aggressive, antisocial actions, including hurting animals
and other children, setting fires, lying, and theft.
Through a cognitive behavioral approach (which generally works better with adolescents than with younger
children because of the levels of thinking and control involved), young people with this disorder are taught ways
to handle anger and resolve conflicts peacefully.
Through instruction, modeling, role playing, and other
techniques, they learn to react to events in socially appropriate, nonviolent ways. Other childhood conditions
for which cognitive behavior therapy has been effective
include generalized anxiety disorder and attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder. It can help children with
ADHD become more controlled and less impulsive;
often, they are taught to memorize and internalize the
following set of behavior guidelines: “Stop—Listen—
Look—Think—Act.”
Cognitive behavioral therapy has also been successful in the treatment of adolescents with eating
disorders, who, unlike those with conduct disorders,
hurt themselves rather than hurting (or attempting to
hurt) others. The cognitive approach focuses on the distorted perceptions that young women with anorexia or
bulimia have about food, eating, and their own bodies.
Often administered in combination with medication,
therapy for eating disorders needs to be continued for an
extended period of time—a year and a half or longer in
the case of anorexia.
Cognitive therapy is generally not used for disorders, such as schizophrenia or autism, in which thinking or communication are severely disturbed.
Further Reading
Beck, Aaron. Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders.
New York: International Universities Press, 1976.
Dryden, Windy, ed. The Essential Albert Ellis: Seminal Writings on Psychotherapy. New York: Springer, 1990.
Feindler, Eva L. Adolescent Anger Control: Cognitive-Behavioral Techniques. New York: Pergamon Press, 1986.
Fishman, Katharine Davis. Behind the One-Way Mirror: Psychotherapy and Children. New York: Bantam Books,
1995.
Mahoney, Michael J., ed. Cognition and Psychotherapy. New
York: Plenum Press, 1985.
Martorano, Joseph T., and John P. Kildahl. Beyond Negative
Thinking: Breaking the Cycle of Depressing and Anxious
Thoughts. New York: Insight Books, 1989.
Wolpe, Joseph. Life Without Fear. Oakland, CA: Harbinger,
1988.

Further Information
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 3615
Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016, (202)
966–7300.
American Society for Adolescent Psychiatry. 4330 East West
Highway, Suite 1117, Bethesda, MD 20814, (301)
718–6502.
Association for Advancement of Behavior Therapy. 15 West
36th St., New York, NY 10018, (212) 279–7970.
Albert Ellis Institute (formerly the Institute for Rational-Emotive Behavior Therapy). 45 East 65th St., New York, NY
10021, (212) 535–0822. http://www.rebt.org.

Cognitive development
The development of thought processes, including
remembering, problem solving, and decision-making, from childhood through adolescence to adulthood.

Historically, the cognitive development of children
has been studied in a variety of ways. The oldest is
through intelligence tests, such as the widely used Stanford Binet Intelligence Quotient, or IQ, test first adopted for use in the United States by psychologist Lewis
Terman (1877-1956) in 1916 from a French model pioneered in 1905. IQ scoring is based on the concept of
“mental age,” according to which the scores of a child of
average intelligence match his or her age, while a gifted
child’s performance is comparable to that of an older
child, and a slow learner’s scores are similar to those of a
younger child. IQ tests are widely used in the United
States, but they have come under increasing criticism for
defining intelligence too narrowly and for being biased
with regard to race and gender. In contrast to the emphasis placed on a child’s native abilities by intelligence
testing, learning theory grew out of work by behaviorist
researchers such as John Watson and B.F. Skinner
(1904-1990), who argued that children are completely
malleable. Learning theory focuses on the role of environmental factors in shaping the intelligence of children,
especially on a child’s ability to learn by having certain
behaviors rewarded and others discouraged.
The most well-known and influential theory of cognitive development is that of French psychologist Jean
Piaget. Piaget’s theory, first published in 1952, grew out
of decades of extensive observation of children, including his own, in their natural environments as opposed to
the laboratory experiments of the behaviorists. Although
Piaget was interested in how children reacted to their environment, he proposed a more active role for them than
that suggested by learning theory. He envisioned a
child’s knowledge as composed of schemas, basic units

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

129

Cognitive development

Other therapeutic techniques may include the completion of graded task assignments, and the deliberate
scheduling of pleasurable activities.

Cognitive development

of knowledge used to organize past experiences and
serve as a basis for understanding new ones. Schemas
are continually being modified by two complementary
processes that Piaget termed assimilation and accommodation. Assimilation refers to the process of taking in
new information by incorporating it into an existing
schema. In other words, we assimilate new experiences
by relating them to things we already know. On the other
hand, accommodation is what happens when the schema
itself changes to accommodate new knowledge. According to Piaget, cognitive development involves an ongoing attempt to achieve a balance between assimilation
and accommodation that he termed equilibration.

of their thinking, and think about two concepts, such as
length and width, simultaneously. They also begin to
lose their egocentric focus, becoming able to understand
a situation from the viewpoint of another person.
The fourth, or formal operations, stage begins in
early adolescence (age 11 or 12) with the development of
the ability to think logically about abstractions, including
speculations about what might happen in the future. Adolescents are capable of formulating and testing hypotheses, understanding causality, and dealing with abstract
concepts like probability, ratio, proportion, and analogies.
They become able to reason scientifically and speculate
about philosophical issues. Abstract concepts and moral
values become as important as concrete objects.

Piaget’s stages of cognitive development
At the center of Piaget’s theory is the principle that
cognitive development occurs in a series of four distinct,
universal stages, each characterized by increasingly sophisticated and abstract levels of thought. These stages
always occur in the same order, and each builds on what
was learned in the previous stage. During the first, or
sensorimotor, stage (birth to 24 months), knowledge is
gained primarily through sensory impressions and motor
activity. Through these two modes of learning, experienced both separately and in combination, infants gradually learn to control their own bodies and objects in the
external world. The ultimate task at this stage is to
achieve a sense of object constancy, or permanence—the
sense that objects go on existing even when we cannot
see them. This developing concept can be seen in the
child’s keen enjoyment of games in which objects are repeatedly made to disappear and reappear.
The preoperational stage (ages two to six years) involves the manipulation of images and symbols. One object can represent another, as when a broom is turned
into a “horsey” that can be ridden around the room, and a
child’s play expands to include “pretend” games. Language acquisition is yet another way of manipulating
symbols. Key concepts involved in the logical organization of thoughts—such as causality, time, and perspective—are still absent, as is an awareness that substances
retain the same volume even when shifted into containers of different sizes and shapes. The child’s focus remains egocentric throughout both the preoperational and
sensorimotor stages.
During the third, or concrete operational, stage (six
or seven to 11 years of age), children can perform logical
operations, but only in relation to concrete external objects rather than ideas. They can add, subtract, count, and
measure, and they learn about the conservation of length,
mass, area, weight, time, and volume. At this stage, children can sort items into categories, reverse the direction
130

Modern views
In the decades since Piaget’s theory of cognitive development became widely known, other researchers have
contested some of its principles, claiming that children’s
progress through the four stages of development is more
uneven and less consistent than Piaget believed. It has
been found that children do not always reach the different stages at the age levels he specified, and that their
entry into some of the stages is more gradual than was
first thought. However, Piaget remains the most influential figure in modern child development research, and
many of his ideas are still considered accurate, including
the basic notion of qualitative shifts in children’s thinking over time, the general trend toward greater logic and
less egocentrism as they get older, the concepts of assimilation and accommodation, and the importance of active
learning by questioning and exploring.
The most significant alternative to the work of Piaget has been the information-processing approach,
which uses the computer as a model to provide new insight into how the human mind receives, stores, retrieves, and uses information. Researchers using information-processing theory to study cognitive development in children have focused on areas such as the gradual improvements in children’s ability to take in
information and focus selectively on certain parts of it
and their increasing attention spans and capacity for
memory storage. For example, they have found that the
superior memory skills of older children are due in part
to memorization strategies, such as repeating items in
order to memorize them or dividing them into categories.
Today it is widely accepted that a child’s intellectual
ability is determined by a combination of heredity and
environment. Thus, although a child’s genetic inheritance is unchangeable, there are definite ways that parents can enhance their children’s intellectual development through environmental factors. They can provide

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Bruner, Jerome S. Studies in Cognitive Growth: A Collaboration at the Center for Cognitive Studies. New York: Wiley,
1966.
Ginsburg, Herbert, and Sylvia Opper. Piaget’s Theory of Intellectual Development. 3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1988.
Lee, Victor, and Prajna Das Gupta., eds. Children’s Cognitive
and Language Development. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell
Publishers, 1995.
McShane, John. Cognitive Development: An Information Processing Approach. Oxford, Eng.: B. Blackwell, 1991.
Piaget, Jean, and Barbel Inhelder. The Growth of Logical
Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence. New York:
Basic Books, 1958.
Sameroff, Arnold J., and Marshall M. Haith, eds. The Five to
Seven Year Shift: The Age of Reason and Responsibility.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.

Cognition
A general term for the higher mental processes by
which people acquire knowledge, solve problems,
and plan for the future.

models (visualizing the physical form an idea might
take), schemas (diagrams or maps), scripts (scenarios),
and images (physical models of the item). Other fundamental aspects of cognition are reasoning, the process by
which people formulate arguments and arrive at conclusions, and problem solving—devising a useful representation of a problem and planning, executing, and evaluating a solution.
Memory—another cognitive function—is crucial to
learning, communication, and even to one’s sense of
identity (as evidenced by the effects of amnesia). Shortterm memory provides the basis for one’s working
model of the world and makes possible most other mental functions; long-term memory stores information for
longer periods of time. The three basic processes common to both short- and long-term memory are encoding,
which deposits information in the memory; storage; and
retrieval. Currently, the question of whether short- and
long-term memory are qualitatively and biologically distinct is a matter of debate.
The cognitive function that most distinctively sets
humans apart from other animals is the ability to communicate through language, which involves expressing
propositions as sentences and understanding such expressions when we hear or read them. Language also enables the mind to communicate with itself. The interaction between language and thought has been a topic of
much speculation. Of historical interest is the work of
Benjamin Whorf (1897-1941), the proponent of the idea
that the language people use determines the way in
which they view the world. As of the late 1990s, most
psychologists view the Whorfian hypothesis with skepticism, believing that language and perception interact to
influence one another.

Cognition depends on the ability to imagine or represent objects and events that are not physically present
at a given moment. Cognitive functions include attention, perception, thinking, judging, decision making,
problem solving, memory, and linguistic ability.

Language acquisition is another topic of debate,
with some—including psycholinguist Noam Chomsky
—arguing that all humans have innate language abilities,
while behaviorists stress the role of conditioning and social learning theorists stress the importance of imitation
and reinforcement.

One of the most basic cognitive functions is the ability to conceptualize, or group individual items together
as instances of a single concept or category, such as
“apple” or “chair.” Concepts provide the fundamental
framework for thought, allowing people to relate most
objects and events they encounter to preexisting categories. People learn concepts by building prototypes to
which variations are added and by forming and testing
hypotheses about which items belong to a particular category. Most thinking combines concepts in different
forms. Examples of different forms concepts take include propositions (proposals or possibilities), mental

Since the 1950s, cognitive psychology, which focuses on the relationship between cognitive processes
and behavior, has occupied a central place in psychological research. The cognitive psychologist studies human
perceptions and the ways in which cognitive processes
operate on them to produce responses. One of the foremost cognitive psychologists is Jerome Bruner, who
has done important work on the ways in which needs,
motivations, and expectations (or “mental sets”) affect
perception. In 1960, Bruner and his colleague, George A.
Miller, established the Harvard Center for Cognitive
Studies, which was influential in the “cognitive revolu-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

131

Cognition

stimulating learning materials and experiences from an
early age, reading to and talking with their children and
helping them explore the world around them. As children
mature, parents can both challenge and support the
child’s talents. Although a supportive environment in
early childhood provides a clear advantage for a child, it
is possible to make up for early losses in cognitive development if a supportive environment is provided at some
later period, in contrast to early disruptions in physical
development, which are often irreversible.

Cognitive dissonance

tion” of the following years. In the area of linguistics, the
work of Noam Chomsky has rekindled the age-old debate over whether language exists in the mind before experience. Other well-known work in cognitive psychology includes that of D.E. Berlyne on curiosity and information seeking; George Kelly’s theory of personal constructs; and investigations by Herman Witkin, Riley
Gardner, and George Klein on individual perceptual and
cognitive styles.

forced to deal with the opposing thoughts “I smoke” and
“smoking is dangerous” are likely to alter one of them
by deciding to quit smoking. Alternatively, one can diffuse dissonance by reducing its importance (discounting
the evidence against smoking or adopting the view that
smoking will not harm you personally); adding new information that gives more weight to one of the dissonant
beliefs or appears to reconcile them (deciding that smoking is less dangerous than the stresses it helps alleviate).

The development of the modern computer has influenced current ways of thinking about cognition through
computer simulation of cognitive processes for research
purposes and through the creation of information-processing models. These models portray cognition as a system that receives information, represents it with symbols, and then manipulates the representations in various
ways. The senses transmit information from outside
stimuli to the brain, which applies perceptual processes
to interpret it and then decides how to respond to it. The
information may simply be stored in the memory or it
may be acted on. Acting on it usually affects a person’s
environment in some way, providing more feedback for
the system to process. Major contributions in the area of
information processing include D.E. Broadbent’s information theory of attention, learning, and memory; and
Miller, Galanter, and Pribram’s analysis of planning and
problem solving.

In a classic study of cognitive dissonance, subjects
were asked to perform a dull task and then to persuade
others that this task was interesting and enjoyable. Some
were paid one dollar to do this, while others were paid
$20, and all of their attitudes toward the task were measured at the conclusion of the experiment. The subjects
who had been paid one dollar showed a marked improvement in their attitude toward the task, while the more
highly paid subjects did not. The designers of the experiment interpreted their results in the following way. Cognitive dissonance was created in all of the subjects by the
conflicting facts that the task had been boring and that
they were saying it was interesting—their statements and
beliefs did not match. However, those who were paid
$20 had been given a justification for lying: they could
tell themselves that their actions made some kind of
sense. However, the actions of the other group made no
sense unless they could persuade themselves that the
task had indeed been interesting. Thus they acted to reduce the dissonance by changing their original belief.

See also Artificial intelligence; Cognitive development
Further Reading
Anderson, John R. Cognitive Psychology and Its Implications.
New York: W.H. Freeman, 1985.
Ashcraft, Mark H. Human Memory and Cognition. New York:
HarperCollins College Publishers, 1994.
Broadbent, Donald E. Perception and Communication. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
Halpern, Diane F. Sex Differences in Cognitive Abilities. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1992.

Cognitive dissonance
An influential concept in the study of the relationship between attitudes and behavior.

First proposed by Leon Festinger in 1957, the theory of cognitive dissonance is based on the principle that
people prefer their cognitions, or beliefs, to be consistent
with each other and with their own behavior.
Inconsistency, or dissonance, among their own ideas
makes people uneasy enough to alter these ideas so that
they will agree with each other. For example, smokers
132

Children have shown similar responses to experimental situations involving cognitive dissonance. In one
case, children were asked not to play with an appealing
toy. One experimenter made this request mildly and politely while another one made it in a threatening fashion.
Those children who had accommodated the polite request
also became less attracted to the toy, since liking the toy
and giving it up were conflicting experiences that created
dissonance. However, the children who were threatened
felt no pressure to change their opinions about the toy
since they had a logical reason for giving it up.
Several types of cognitive dissonance have been
identified. In post-decision dissonance, a person must decide between two choices, each of which has both positive and negative components (in other contexts, this type
of situation is called a multiple approach-avoidance conflict). Forced compliance dissonance occurs when people
are forced to act in ways that conflict with their beliefs
and can not find any way to justify their actions to themselves. Dissonance also occurs when people are exposed
to new information that threatens or changes their current
beliefs. Various group situations also generate cognitive
dissonance. It occurs when a person must abandon old
beliefs or adopt new ones in order to join a group, when

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Group situations sometimes create cognitive dissonance. A
potential member of a group will change his or her opinions
to conform to the group’s collective opinion. In Hitler’s
Germany, this had tragic consequences. (Bildarchiv
Preussischer Kulturbursitz. Reproduced with permission.)

members disagree with each other, and when the group as
a whole has its central beliefs threatened by an external
event or by the receipt of new information.
Festinger proposed that some individuals have a
higher tolerance for cognitive dissonance than others.
Subsequent researchers have found correlations between
various personality traits, such as extroversion, and the
ability to withstand dissonance.
Further Reading
Festinger, Leon. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press, 1957.

Cognitive psychology
An approach to psychology which focuses on the
relationship between cognitive or mental processes
and behavior.

The cognitive psychologist studies human perceptions and the ways in which cognitive processes operate

The challenges of studying human cognition are evident when one considers the work of the mind in processing the simultaneous and sometimes conflicting information presented in daily life, through both internal
and external stimuli. For example, an individual may feel
hunger pangs, the external heat of the sun, and sensations of bodily movement produced by walking while simultaneously talking, listening to a companion, and recalling past experiences. Although this attention to multiple stimuli is a common phenomenon, complex cognitive processing is clearly required to accomplish it.
At its inception as a discipline in the nineteenth century, psychology focused on mental processes. However,
the prevailing structuralist methods, which analyzed consciousness introspectively by breaking it down into sensations, images, and affective states, fell out of favor
early in the twentieth century and were superseded by
those of the behaviorists, who replaced speculation about
inner processes with the study of external, observable
phenomena. Although important inroads continued to be
made into the study of mental processes—including the
work of the Würzburg School, the Gestalt psychologists,
the field theory of Kurt Lewin, and Jean Piaget’s theories of cognitive development in children—the behaviorist focus remained dominant in the United States through
the middle of the twentieth century.
Since the 1950s, cognitive approaches have assumed
a central place in psychological research and theorizing.
One of its foremost pioneers is Jerome Bruner, who, together with his colleague Leo Postman, did important
work on the ways in which needs, motivations, and expectations (or “mental sets”) affect perception. Bruner’s
work led him to an interest in the cognitive development
of children and related issues of education, and he later

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

133

Cognitive psychology

to produce responses. Cognitive processes (which may
involve language, symbols, or imagery) include perceiving, recognizing, remembering, imagining, conceptualizing, judging, reasoning, and processing information for
planning, problem-solving, and other applications. Some
cognitive psychologists may study how internal cognitive operations can transform symbols of the external
world, others on the interplay between genetics and environment in determining individual cognitive development and capabilities. Still other cognitive psychologists
may focus their studies on how the mind detects, selects,
recognizes, and verbally represents features of a particular stimulus. Among the many specific topics investigated by cognitive psychologists are language acquisition;
visual and auditory perception; information storage and
retrieval; altered states of consciousness; cognitive restructuring (how the mind mediates between conflicting,
or dissonant, information); and individual styles of
thought and perception.

Cognitive therapy

developed a theory of cognitive growth. His theories,
which approached development from a different angle
than—and mostly complement—those of Piaget, focus
on the environmental and experiential factors influencing
each individual’s specific development pattern.
In 1957, Leon Festinger advanced his classic theory
of cognitive dissonance, which describes how people
manage conflicting cognitions about themselves, their behavior, or their environment. Festinger posited that conflict among such cognitions (which he termed dissonance) will make people uncomfortable enough to actually modify one of the conflicting beliefs to bring it into
line with the other belief. Thus, for example, the conflicting cognitions “I smoke” and “smoking is bad” will lead
a smoker either to alter the first statement by quitting, or
the second one by telling himself or herself that smoking
is not bad. In 1960, Jerome Bruner and George A. Miller
established the Harvard Center for Cognitive Studies,
which became influential in the “cognitive revolution.”
As a result, an increasing number of experimental psychologists abandoned behaviorist studies of rats and
mazes for research involving the higher mental processes
in human beings. This trend in psychology paralleled advances in several other fields, including neuroscience,
mathematics, anthropology, and computer science.
Language became an important area of study for
cognitive psychologists. In 1953, the term “psycholinguistics” was coined to designate an emerging area of
common interest, the psychology of language, and
Noam Chomsky, a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, became its most famous proponent.
Chomsky argued that the underlying logic, or deep structure, of all languages is the same and that human mastery
of it is genetically determined, not learned. His work has
been highly controversial, rekindling the age-old debate
over whether language exists in the mind before experience. Other well-known studies in cognitive psychology
includes that of D.E. Berlyne’s work on curiosity and information seeking; George Kelly’s theory of personal
constructs, and investigations by Herman Witkin, Riley
Gardner, and George Klein on individual perceptual and
cognitive styles.
The emergence of cybernetics and computer science
have been central to contemporary advances in cognitive
psychology, including computer simulation of cognitive
processes for research purposes and the creation of information-processing models. Herbert Simon and Allen
Newell created the first computer simulation of human
thought, called Logic Theorist, at Carnegie-Mellon University in 1956, followed by General Problem Solver
(GPS) the next year. Other major contributions in this
area include D.E. Broadbent’s information theory of attention, learning, and memory, and Miller, Galanter, and
134

Pribram’s analysis of planning and problem solving. Despite skepticism that computer-generated “thought” will
ever match human cognition, the study of artificial intelligence has helped scientists learn more about the
human mind. In turn, this type of psychological research
is expected to aid in the development of more sophisticated computers in the future through links between the
psychological study of cognition and research in electrophysiology and computer science. This subfield of cognitive engineering focuses on the application of knowledge about human thought processes to the design of
complex systems for aviation, industry, and other areas.
At one time, the study of cognitive processes was
specific to cognitive psychology. As research began to
yield information regarding the applicability of these
processes to all areas of psychology, the study of cognitive processes was taken up and applied in many other
subfields of psychology, such as abnormal and developmental psychology. Today, the term “cognitive perspective” or “cognitive approach” is applied in a broader
sense to these and other areas of psychology.
See also Abnormal psychology; Cognitive behavior
therapy; Cognitive development; Information-processing
approach

Cognitive therapy
Cognitive therapy is a psychosocial therapy that assumes that faulty cognitive, or thought, patterns
cause maladaptive behavior and emotional responses. The treatment focuses on changing
thoughts in order to adjust psychological and personality problems.

Purpose
Psychologist Aaron Beck developed the cognitive
therapy concept in the 1960s. The treatment is based on
the principle that maladaptive behavior (ineffective, selfdefeating behavior) is triggered by inappropriate or irrational thinking patterns, called automatic thoughts. Instead of reacting to the reality of a situation, an individual automatically reacts to his or her own distorted viewpoint of the situation. Cognitive therapy focuses on
changing these thought patterns (also known as cognitive
distortions), by examining the rationality and validity of
the assumptions behind them. This process is termed
cognitive restructuring.
Cognitive therapy is a treatment option for a number
of mental disorders, including agoraphobia, Alzheimer’s
disease, anxiety or panic disorder, attention deficit-hy-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Treatment techniques
Cognitive therapy is usually administered in an outpatient setting (clinic or doctor’s office) by a therapist
trained or certified in cognitive therapy techniques. Therapy may be in either individual or group sessions, and
the course of treatment is short compared to traditional
psychotherapy (often 12 sessions or less). Therapists
are psychologists (Ph.D., Psy.D., Ed.D., or M.A. degree),
clinical social workers (M.S.W., D.S.W., or L.S.W. degree), counselors (M.A. or M.S. degree), or psychiatrists
(M.D. trained in psychiatry).
Therapists use several different techniques in the
course of cognitive therapy to help patients examine
thoughts and behaviors. These include:
• Validity testing. The therapist asks the patient to defend
his or her thoughts and beliefs. If the patient cannot
produce objective evidence supporting his or her assumptions, the invalidity, or faulty nature, is exposed.
• Cognitive rehearsal. The patient is asked to imagine a
difficult situation he or she has encountered in the past,
and then works with the therapist to practice how to
successfully cope with the problem. When the patient
is confronted with a similar situation again, the rehearsed behavior will be drawn on to deal with it.
• Guided discovery. The therapist asks the patient a series of questions designed to guide the patient towards
the discovery of his or her cognitive distortions.
• Journaling. Patients keep a detailed written diary of situations that arise in everyday life, the thoughts and
emotions surrounding them, and the behavior that accompany them. The therapist and patient then review
the journal together to discover maladaptive thought
patterns and how these thoughts impact behavior.
• Homework. In order to encourage self-discovery and
reinforce insights made in therapy, the therapist may
ask the patient to do homework assignments. These
may include note-taking during the session, journaling
(see above), review of an audiotape of the patient session, or reading books or articles appropriate to the
therapy. They may also be more behaviorally focused,
applying a newly learned strategy or coping mecha-

nism to a situation, and then recording the results for
the next therapy session.
• Modeling. Role-playing exercises allow the therapist to
act out appropriate reactions to different situations. The
patient can then model this behavior.
Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) integrates features of behavioral modification into the traditional cognitive restructuring approach. In cognitive-behavioral
therapy, the therapist works with the patient to identify
the thoughts that are causing distress, and employs behavioral therapy techniques to alter the resulting behavior. Patients may have certain fundamental core beliefs,
known as schemas, which are flawed, and are having a
negative impact on the patient’s behavior and functioning. For example, a patient suffering from depression
may develop a social phobia because he/she is convinced
he/she is uninteresting and impossible to love. A cognitive-behavioral therapist would test this assumption by
asking the patient to name family and friends that care
for him/her and enjoy his/her company. By showing the
patient that others value him/her, the therapist exposes
the irrationality of the patient’s assumption and also provides a new model of thought for the patient to change
his/her previous behavior pattern (i.e., I am an interesting and likeable person, therefore I should not have any
problem making new social acquaintances). Additional
behavioral techniques such as conditioning (the use of
positive and/or negative reinforcements to encourage desired behavior) and systematic desensitization (gradual
exposure to anxiety-producing situations in order to extinguish the fear response) may then be used to gradually reintroduce the patient to social situations.

Preparation
Cognitive therapy may not be appropriate for all patients. Patients with significant cognitive impairments
(e.g., patients with traumatic brain injury or organic
brain disease) and individuals who are not willing to take
an active role in the treatment process are not usually
good candidates.
Because cognitive therapy is a collaborative effort
between therapist and patient, a comfortable working relationship is critical to successful treatment. Individuals
interested in cognitive therapy should schedule a consultation session with their prospective therapist before starting treatment. The consultation session is similar to an interview session, and it allows both patient and therapist to
get to know one another. During the consultation, the
therapist gathers information to make an initial assessment of the patient and to recommend both direction and
goals for treatment. The patient has the opportunity to
learn about the therapist’s professional credentials,
his/her approach to treatment, and other relevant issues.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

135

Cognitive therapy

peractivity disorder (ADHD), eating disorders, mood
disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), personality disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD), psychotic disorders, schizophrenia, social phobia, and substance abuse disorders. It can be useful in helping individuals with anger management problems, and has
been reported to be effective in treating insomnia. It is also
frequently prescribed as an adjunct, or complementary,
therapy for patients suffering from back pain, cancer,
rheumatoid arthritis, and other chronic pain conditions.

Robert Martin Coles

In some managed-care settings, an intake interview
is required before a patient can meet with a therapist. The
intake interview is typically performed by a psychiatric
nurse, counselor, or social worker, either face-to-face or
over the phone. It is used to gather a brief background on
treatment history and make a preliminary evaluation of
the patient before assigning them to a therapist.

Typical results
Because cognitive therapy is employed for such a
broad spectrum of illnesses, and is often used in conjunction with medications and other treatment interventions, it is difficult to measure overall success rates for
the therapy. Cognitive and cognitive behavior treatments
have been among those therapies not likely to be evaluated, however, and efficacy is well-documented for some
symptoms and problems.
Some studies have shown that cognitive therapy can
reduce relapse rates in depression and in schizophrenia,
particularly in those patients who respond only marginally to antidepressant medication. It has been suggested
that this is because cognitive therapy focuses on changing the thoughts and associated behavior underlying
these disorders rather than just relieving the distressing
symptoms associated with them.

Robert Coles (AP/Wide World Photos, Inc. Reproduced with
permission.)

Paula Ford-Martin
Further Reading
Alford, B.A. and Beck, A.T. The integrative power of cognitive
therapy. New York: Guilford, 1997.
Beck, A.T. Prisoners of hate: the cognitive basis of anger, hostility, and violence. New York: Harper Collins Publishers, 1999.
Greenberger, Dennis and Christine Padesky. Mind over mood:
a cognitive therapy treatment manual for clients. New
York: Guilford Press, 1995.

Further Information
Beck Institute For Cognitive Therapy And Research. GSB
Building, City Line and Belmont Avenues, Suite 700,
Bala Cynwyd, PA, USA. 19004-1610, fax: (610)6644437, (610)664-3020. Email: beckinst@gim.net.
http://www.beckinstitute.org.

Robert Martin Coles
1929American psychiatrist and author.

Psychiatrist and author Robert Coles pioneered the
use of oral history as a method of studying children. His
136

five-volume series of books called Children in Crisis,
published from 1967-1978, won a Pulitzer Prize in
recognition of its wide-ranging examination of children
throughout the world and how they cope with war,
poverty, and other crises. Trained as a pediatrician as
well as a psychiatrist, Coles became a professor of psychiatry and medical humanities at Harvard University
Medical School in 1978. His lifelong interest in children
has generated more than 50 books.
Coles was born in 1929 in Boston to parents who
encouraged him to read what he has called “spiritually
alert” novelists such as Tolstoy and George Eliot. His
mother was a lifelong community worker; his father’s
values were exemplified in his work from the mid-1960s
to the mid-1980s as an advocate for poor, elderly residents of Boston. Coles studied medicine and psychiatry
in Boston before serving two years as a U.S. Air Force
physician. During advanced training in psychoanalysis
in New Orleans, Coles reached a turning point. Deeply
moved by the sight of a young black girl being heckled
by white segregationists, in 1960 Coles began his examination of children and their hopes and fears by studying
school desegregation in New Orleans. “History had
knocked on the city’s door—a city whose people were
frightened and divided. Had I not been there, driving by

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Coma

the mobs that heckled six-year-old Ruby Bridges, a
black first-grader, as she tried to attend the Frantz
School, I might have pursued a different life,” Coles
writes in the introduction to The Spiritual Life of Children.” I had planned until then to enter the profession of
psychoanalytic child psychiatry. Instead, I became a
‘field worker,’ learning to talk with children going
through their everyday lives amid substantial social and
educational stress.”
Traveling from the Deep South to Appalachia, from
New Mexico to Alaska, Coles eventually traveled overseas to Europe, Africa, Central and South America, and
the Middle East. His wife, Jane, and their three sons
began to share in some of the research, as they talked to
children of all races and social status about religion,
race, poverty, and war. During his career, Coles has written for various medical, psychiatric, and psychoanalytic
journals, in addition to seeing patients when possible. He
has also volunteered as a tutor in a school for underprivileged children. Besides Children in Crisis, Coles’s
prominent books include The Moral Life of Children,
The Political Life of Children, The Spiritual Life of Children, and Women of Crisis.
Further Reading
Coles, Robert. The Mind’s Fate: A Psychiatrist Looks at His
Profession. Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1975.
Gordon, Mary. “What They Think About God.” The New York
Times Book Review, November 25, 1990, p.1+.
Gray, Francine du Plessix. “When We Are Good We Are Very,
Very Good.” The New York Times Book Review, November 21, 1993, p. 9.

Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of the eye’s rods and
cones. (Omikron/Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with
permission.)

inherited condition which affects more men than women,
has two varieties: monochromats lack all cone receptors
and cannot see any color; dichromats lack either redgreen or blue-yellow cone receptors and cannot perceive
hues in those respective ranges. Another phenomenon,
known as color weakness or anomalous trichromat,
refers to the situation where a person can perceive a
given color, but needs greater intensity of the associated
wavelength in order to see it normally.
See also Vision

Coma
An abnormal state of profound unconsciousness
accompanied by the absence of all voluntary behavior and most reflexes.

Color vision
The ability to perceive color.

Color vision is a function of the brain’s ability to
interpret the complex way in which light is reflected off
every object in nature. What the human eye sees as color
is not a quality of an object itself, nor a quality of the
light reflected off the object; it is actually an effect of the
stimulation of different parts of the brain’s visual system
by the varying wavelengths of light.
Each of three types of light receptors called cones, located in the retina of the eye, recognizes certain ranges of
wavelengths of light as blue, green, or red. From the cones,
color signals pass via neurons along the visual pathway
where they are mixed and matched to create the perception of the full spectrum of 5 million colors in the world.
Because each person’s neurons are unique, each of
us sees color somewhat differently. Color blindness, an

A coma may be induced by a severe neurological injury—either temporary or permanent—or by other physical trauma. A comatose individual cannot be aroused by
even the most intense stimuli, although he or she may
show some automatic movements in response to pain.
Comas often occur just before death in the course of
many diseases. The affected brain cells may be either
near the surface (cerebral cortex) or deeper in the brain
(diencephalon or brainstem). Specific conditions that
produce comas include cerebral hemorrhage; blood clots
in the brain; failure of oxygen supply to the brain; tumors; intracranial infections that cause meningitis or encephalitis; poisoning, especially by carbon monoxide or
sedatives; concussion; and disorders involving electrolytes. Comas may also be caused by metabolic abnormalities that impair the functioning of the brain through
a sharp drop in the blood sugar level, such as diabetes.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

137

Coma

Cortex

Thalamus

Mid-brain reticular
formation

A side-view of the brain, showing movement
of the reticular activating substance (RAS)
essential to consciousness
Diffuse and bilateral damage to the cerebral cortex
(relative preservation of brain-stem reflexes)

Mass lesions in this region resulting in
compression of the brain-stem and damage
to the reticular activating substance (RAS)

Brain-stem
compression

Possible causes
• Damage due to lack of oxygen or restricted blood flow, perhaps
resulting form cardiac arrest, an anaesthetic accident, or shock
• Damage incurred from metabolic processes associated with
kidney or liver failure, or with hypoglycemia
• Trauma damage
• Damage due to a bout with meningitis, encephalomyelitis, or a
severe systemic infection

Structural lesions within this region also resulting
in compression of the brain-stem and damage to
the reticular activating substance (RAS)

Lesions within the brain-stem directly suppressing
the reticular activating substance (RAS)

Local brain-stem
pressure
Symmetrical
depression of
brain-stem reflexes

Asymmetrical brainstem signs
Possible causes • Cerebellar tumors, abscesses, or hemorrhages

Possible causes • Drug overdosage

The four brain conditions that result in coma. (Hans & Cassidy. Gale Group. Reproduced with permission.)

138

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Post-traumatic stress disorder
Further Reading
Herman, Judith Lewis. Trauma and Recovery. New York: Basic
Books, 1992.
Porterfield, Kay Marie. Straight Talk About Post-traumatic
Stress Disorder: Coping With the Aftermath of Trauma.
New York: Facts on File, 1996.
Waites, Elizabeth A. Trauma and Survival: Post-traumatic and
Dissociative Disorders in Women. New York: Norton, 1993.

Combat neurosis
The preferred term to describe mental disturbances
related to the stress of military combat; also known
by such alternative terms as combat fatigue syndrome, shell shock, operational or battle fatigue,
combat exhaustion, and war neurosis.

Combat neurosis describes any personality disturbance that represents a response to the stress of war. It is
closely related to post-traumatic stress disorder, and is
often characterized under that term. Symptoms of the
disturbance may appear during the battle itself, or may
appear days, weeks, months, or even years later. An estimated ten percent of all personnel who fought in World
War II experienced symptoms of combat neurosis,
known then according to the American Psychiatric Association as “gross stress reaction.” (The term was applied to personality disturbances resulting from catastrophes other than war as well.) More recently, considerable
attention from both the general public and the medical
community has focused on the combat neuroses experienced by those who fought during the Vietnam and Persian Gulf Wars. There is no specific set of symptoms that
are triggered by war or combat; rather, in most cases, the
disturbance begins with feelings of mild anxiety.
Symptoms of combat neuroses vary widely. The first
signs are typically increased irritability and problems with
sleeping. As the disturbance progresses, symptoms include depression, bereavement-type reactions (characterized as guilt over having survived when others did not),
nightmares, and persistent, terrifying daydreams. The inability to concentrate and loss of memory are also common. Emotional indifference, withdrawal, lack of attention to personal hygiene and appearance, and self-endangering behaviors are also possible signs of combat neurosis. Individuals suffering from combat neurosis often react
to these symptoms by abusing alcohol or drugs.
Combat neuroses can be a severe mental disorder
and the potential success of treatment varies considerably. Some patients are treated successfully with antidepressant and antianxiety medications. For a small percentage, however, hospitalization may be required.

Communication skills and
disorders
The skills needed to use language (spoken, written,
signed, or otherwise communicated) to interact
with others, and problems related to the development of these skills.

Language employs symbols—words, gestures, or
spoken sounds—to represent objects and ideas. Communication of language begins with spoken sounds combined with gestures, relying on two different types of
skills. Children first acquire the skills to receive communications, that is, listening to and understanding what
they hear (supported by accompanying gestures). Next,
they will begin experimenting with expressing themselves through speaking and gesturing. Speaking will
begin as repetitive syllables, followed by words, phrases,
and sentences. Later, children will acquire the skills of
reading and writing, the written forms of communication. Although milestones are discussed for the development of these skills of communication, many children
begin speaking significantly earlier or later than the
milestone date. Parents should refrain from attaching too
much significance to either deviation from the average.
When a child’s deviation from the average milestones of
development cause the parents concern, they may contact a pediatrician or other professional for advice.
Spoken language problems are referred to by a number of labels, including language delay, language disability, or a specific type of language disability. In general, experts distinguish between those people who seem to
be slow in developing spoken language (language delay)
and those who seem to have difficulty achieving a milestone of spoken language (language disorders). Language
disorders include stuttering; articulation disorders, such
as substituting one sound for another (tandy for candy),
omitting a sound (canny for candy), or distorting a sound
(shlip for sip); and voice disorders, such as inappropriate
pitch, volume, or quality. Causes can be related to hear-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

139

Communication skills and disorders

The passage from wakefulness to coma can be rapid
and/or gradual. Often, it is preceded by lethargy and then
a state resembling light sleep. In general, treatment of a
coma involves avoiding further damage to the brain by
maintaining the patient’s respiratory and cardiac functions, and by an intravenous (usually glucose) nutritional
supply to the brain.

Communication skills and disorders

COMMUNICATION MILESTONES
Age

Milestone

0–12 months

• Responds to speech by looking at the speaker; responds differently to aspects of speakers
voice (such as friendly or angry, male or female).
• Turns head in direction of sound.
• Responds with gestures to greetings such as "hi," "bye-bye," and "up" when these words are
accompanied by appropriate gestures by speaker.
• Stops ongoing activity when told "no," when speaker uses appropriate gesture and tone.
• May say two or three words by around 12 months of age, although probably not clearly.
• Repeats some vowel and consonant sounds (babbles) when alone or spoken to; attempts to
imitate sounds.

12–24 months

• Responds correctly when asked "where?"
• Understands prepositions on, in, and under; and understands simple phrases (such as "Get the
ball.")
• Says 8–10 words by around age 18 months; by age two, vocabulary will include 20–50 words,
mostly describing people, common objects, and events (such as "more" and "all gone").
• Uses single word plus a gesture to ask for objects.
• Refers to self by name; uses "my" or "mine."

24–36 months

•
•
•
•
•

36–48 months

•
•
•
•

48–60 months

• By 48 months, has a vocabulary of over 200 words.
• Follows two or three unrelated commands in proper order.
• Understands sequencing of events, for example, "First we have to go to the grocery store,
and then we can go to the playground."
• Ask questions using "when," "how," and why." Talks about causes for things using "because."

Points to pictures of common objects when they are named.
Can identify objects when told their use.
Understands questions with "what" and "where" and negatives "no." "not," "can't," and don't."
Responds to simple directions.
Selects and looks at picture books; enjoys listening to simple stories, and asks for them to be
read aloud again.
• Joins two vocabulary words together to make a phrase.
• Can say first and last name.
• Shows frustration at not being understood.
Begins to understand time concepts, such as "today," "later," "tomorrow," and "yesterday."
Understands comparisons, such as "big" and "bigger."
Forms sentences with three or more words.
Speech is understandable to most strangers, but some sound errors may persists (such as "t"
sound for "k" sound).

ing, nerve/muscle disorders, head injury, viral diseases,
mental retardation, drug abuse, or cleft lip or palate.

Pinker, S. The Language Instinct. New York: Morrow, 1994.

Further Reading
Bates, Elizabeth, and Jeffrey Elman. “Learning Rediscovered.”
Science 274, (December 13, 1996): 1849+.
Berko-Gleason, J. The Development of Language. New York:
Macmillan, 1993.
Cowley, Geoffrey. “The Language Explosion.” Newsweek 129,
(Spring-Summer 1997): 16+.
140

Goodluck, H. Language Acquisition: A Linguistic Introduction.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers, 1991.

Further Information
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 1801
Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852, voice or TTY(301)
897–8682, voice or TTY (800) 638–8255. Email: ircasha.org. www.asha.org. (Publishes brochures, booklets,
and fact sheets on speech-language pathology.)

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Comparative psychology
A subfield of experimental psychology which focuses on the study of animals for the purpose of
comparing the behavior of different species.

Studies of animal behavior have taken two main directions in the twentieth century. The type of research
most often practiced in the United States has been animal research, involving the study of animals in laboratories and emphasizing the effects of environment on behavior. European research, by comparison, has been
more closely associated with the area of inquiry known
as ethology, which concentrates on studying animals in
their natural environment and emphasizes the evolution
of behavioral patterns which are typical of a particular
species. Prompting an increase in the study of animal behavior, ethology has laid the groundwork for an understanding of species-typical behavior and also led to
progress in relating and contrasting behaviors among
different species. Comparative psychology serves a number of functions. It provides information about the genetic relations among different species, furthers understanding of human behavior, tests the limitations of psychological theories, and aids in the conservation of the natural environment.

Competence to stand trial
The ability of a person charged with a crime to understand the nature and purpose of the criminal
proceedings.

Defendants in a criminal trial must have the ability
(i.e., the competence) to understand the charges, to consult with an attorney, and to have a rational grasp of the
courtroom proceedings. This requirement is a longstanding and fundamental principle of criminal law. Its
purpose is to ensure that defendants can participate
meaningfully in their own defense. The requirement
refers to the defendant’s competence at the time of the
trial, rather than their psychological state at the time of
the alleged offense. Rationality is a key issue in competency determinations. People judged to be incompetent
usually lack the ability to understand, communicate, or

make rational decisions. The legal requirement, however,
does not indicate how judgments about competency
should be make. Furthermore, some cases are more complex than others. Consequently it is possible for a defendant to be competent for certain kinds of legal proceedings, but not for others.
There are a number of questions that evaluators
might seek to answer when making a competency determination. Does the defendant understand the charges?
Does he appreciate the possible penalties? Does he appreciate the adversarial nature of the courtroom? Can he
discuss legal strategy with his lawyer? Can he behave
appropriately in the courtroom? Can he provide meaningful testimony in his own defense? The issue of competence can arise at any point during criminal proceedings, and may be initiated by the defense, by the prosecutor, or by the judge. Prior to 1972, defendants found to
be incompetent could be confined to mental hospitals
for very lengthy periods of time—sometimes for a
longer period than they would have served if they had
been found guilty. A U. S. Supreme Court ruling in 1972
restricted the length of time a defendant could be hospitalized because of incompetence to stand trial.
Once the question of competence arises, a competency evaluation will be conducted. The evaluation typically takes place in a special hospital or clinic. A number
of professionals may be qualified to conduct such examinations, including physicians, psychiatrists, psychologists, and social workers. There are several different psychological tests or procedures that designed to assist in
the assessment of competence to stand trial. One of these
is the Competency Screening Test (CST). It is a 22-item
sentence completion test that requires the test-taker to
complete sentence stems, such as: “When I go to court,
the lawyer will ______________________.” Answers
are scored as indicating competence, questionable competence, or incompetence. Total scores are calculated
with a cutoff score that indicates possible incompetence.
Another assessment test is the Competency Assessment
Instrument (CAI). It consists of a detailed face-to-face
interview about various aspects of competent functioning, including an appreciation of the charges and an understanding of the various roles of the judge, witnesses,
jury, prosecutor, etc.
Research has shown that when competency evaluations occur, most (70%) of the defendants who are assessed are judged competent. As a group, those judged
incompetent tend to have been charged with more serious crimes, compared to defendants in general. They
also are likely to have a history of psychosis, to have a
serious current mental disorder, and to be poorly educated. Once a defendant is judged to be competent, the legal
proceedings are resumed and a trial takes place. If the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

141

Competence to stand trial

National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders. National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892. Email: webmaster@ms.nih.gov.
www.nih.gov/nidcd/.

Competition

defendant is found incompetent, the charges may be
dropped for crimes that are not serious. Otherwise the
defendant is returned to an institution until competency
can be restored. Until then, all legal proceedings are
postponed. If competency cannot be restored within a
reasonable period of time (e.g., within a year or so), defendants may be committed to a hospital through involuntary civil (i.e., noncriminal) proceedings.
Theodore Kaczynski was accused in April, 1996 of
being the serial bomber who built homemade bombs that
killed three people and injured many others between
1978 and 1995. At the beginning of his trial he disrupted
the proceedings because of a dispute with his lawyers
about his defense. His request to represent himself and
an attempted suicide provoked concerns about his competence. The court requested a competency assessment.
Kaczynski (also known as the Unabomber) was judged
by the psychiatrist who conducted the assessment to be
legally competent to stand trial. In her report to the court,
the psychiatrist said that Kaczynski was not suffering
from any mental defect that could prevent him from understanding the nature of the charges, or from assisting
his lawyers in mounting a defense. On the other hand,
she noted that he was suffering from paranoid schizophrenia. Ultimately, a trial was averted when he agreed
to plead guilty to numerous charges in exchange for a
promise that prosecutors would not seek the death penalty during his sentencing. He was sentenced to four life
terms plus 30 years with no possibility of parole. The
Unabomber case provides a good illustration of a situation in which a psychological disorder did not necessarily harm the defendant’s ability to participate meaningfully in the trial proceedings.
Timothy Moore
Further Reading
Wrightsman, L., Nietzel, M., & Fortune, W. Psychology and
the Legal System. New York: Brooks Cole, 1998.

Competition
An adaptive strategy that pits one person’s interests
against another’s.

Psychologists have long been in disagreement as to
whether competition is a learned or a genetic component
of human behavior. Perhaps what first comes to mind
when thinking of competition is athletics. It would be a
mistake, however, not to recognize the effect competition
has in the areas of academics, work, and many other
142

areas of contemporary life. This is especially true in the
United States, where individual rigor and competition
appear to be nationalistic qualities Americans cherish
and praise. It has often been suggested that the American
capitalist-driven society thrives because of the spirited
competition for a limited amount of resources available.
Psychologically speaking, competition has been
seen as an inevitable consequence of the psychoanalytic
view of human drives and is a natural state of being. According to Sigmund Freud, humans are born screaming
for attention and full of organic drives for fulfillment in
various areas. Initially, according to this view, we compete for the attention of our parents—seeking to attract it
either from siblings or from the other parent. Thereafter,
we are at the mercy of a battle between our base impulses for self-fulfillment and social and cultural mores
which prohibit pure indulgence.
Current work in anthropology has suggested, however, that this view of the role of competition in human
behavior may be incorrect. Thomas Hobbes (15881679), one of the great philosophers of the seventeenth
century, is perhaps best remembered for his characterization of the “natural world,” that is, the world before the
imposition of the will of humanity, as being “nasty,
brutish, and short.” This image of the pre-rational world
is still widely held, reinforced by Charles Darwin’s seminal work, The Origin of Species, which established the
doctrine of natural selection. This doctrine, which posits
that those species best able to adapt to and master the natural environment in which they live will survive, has
suggested to many that the struggle for survival is an inherent human trait which determines a person’s success.
Darwin’s theory has even been summarized as “survival
of the fittest”—a phrase Darwin himself never used—further highlighting competition’s role in success. As it has
often been pointed out, however, there is nothing in the
concept of natural selection that suggests that competition
is the most successful strategy for “survival of the fittest.”
Darwin asserted in The Origin of Species that the struggles he was describing should be viewed as metaphors and
could easily include dependence and cooperation.
Many studies have been conducted to test the importance placed on competition as opposed to other values,
such as cooperation—by various cultures, and generally
conclude that Americans uniquely praise competition as
natural, inevitable, and desirable. In 1937, the worldrenowned anthropologist Margaret Mead published Cooperation and Competition among Primitive Peoples,
based on her studies of several societies that did not prize
competition, and, in fact, seemed at times to place a negative value on it. One such society was the Zuni Indians of
Arizona, and they, Mead found, valued cooperation far
more than competition. For example, the Zuni held a ritu-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Concept formation
Dominique Dawes on the uneven bars during competition. Psychologists disagree as to whether competition is a learned or
genetic component of human behavior. (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with permission.)

al footrace that anyone could participate in, the winner of
which was never publicly acknowledged and, in fact, if
one person made a habit of winning the race, that person
was prevented from participating in the future. After
studying dozens of such cultures, Mead’s final conclusion
was that competitiveness is a culturally created aspect of
human behavior, and that its prevalence in a particular society is relative to how that society values it.
Further Reading
Boyd, David. “Strategic Behaviour in Contests: Evidence from
the 1992 Barcelona Olympic Games.” Applied Economics
(November 1995): 1037.
Clifford, Nancy. “How Competitive Are You?” Teen Magazine
(September 1995): 56.
Epstein, Joseph. Ambition: The Secret Passion. New York: E.P.
Dutton, 1980.
Freud, Anna. The Writings of Anna Freud. Vol. 6, Normality
and Pathology in Childhood: Assessments of Development. International Universities Press, 1965.
Kohn, Alfie. No Contest: The Case Against Competition.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1986.
Mithers, Carol. “The Need to Compete: Why Competition Is
Good for You.” Ladies Home Journal (February 1995):
136.

Concept formation
Learning process by which items are categorized
and related to each other.

A concept is a generalization that helps to organize
information into categories. For example, the concept
“square” is used to describe those things that have four
equal sides and four right angles. Thus, the concept categorize things whose properties meet the set requirements. The way young children learn concepts has been
studied in experimental situations using so-called artificial concepts such as “square.” In contrast, real-life, or
natural, concepts have characteristic rather than defining
features. For example, a robin would be a prototypical or
“good” example of the concept “bird.” A penguin lacks
an important defining feature of this category—flight,
and thus is not as strong an example of a “bird.” Similarly, for many children the concept “house” represents a
squarish structure with walls, windows, and a chimney
that provides shelter. In later development, the child’s
concept of house would be expanded to include nontypical examples, such as “teepee” or “igloo,” both of which

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

143

Conditioned response

have some but not all of the prototypical characteristics
that the children have learned for this concept.

classical conditioning, the response to the conditioned
stimulus is called a conditioned response.

Natural concepts are often learned through the use
of prototypes, highly typical examples of a category—
like the robin cited above. The other major method of
concept learning is through the trial-and-error method of
testing hypotheses. People will guess or assume that a
certain item is an instance of a particular concept; they
then learn more about the concept when they see
whether their hypothesis is correct or not.

Conditioned responses develop in a process called
acquisition, in which the natural or unconditioned stimulus is paired with the conditioned stimulus. Some responses develop more quickly than others; similarly,
some responses are stronger than others. The nature of
the conditioned response depends on the circumstances
in which acquisition occurs. The conditioned response
emerges most effectively if the conditioned stimulus appears slightly before the unconditioned stimulus. This
process is called “delayed conditioning” because the unconditioned stimulus is delayed relative to the conditioned stimulus. The response is weaker if the conditioned and unconditioned stimuli begin together, and becomes even weaker if the unconditioned stimulus precedes the conditioned stimulus. In general, the
conditioned response resembles the unconditioned response (e.g., the normal fright response) very closely.
Psychologists have shown, however, that the conditioned
response is not identical to the unconditioned response
and may be very different.

People learn simple concepts more readily than
complex ones. For example, the easiest concept to learn
is one with only a single defining feature. The next easiest is one with multiple features, all of which must be
present in every case, known as the conjunctive concept.
In conjunctive concepts, and links all the required attributes. For example, the concept square is defined by four
sides and four 90-degree angles. It is more difficult to
master a so-called disjunctive concept, when either one
feature or another must be present. People also learn
concepts more easily when they are given positive rather
than negative examples of a concept (e.g., shown what it
is rather than what it is not).
Further Reading
Bruner, Jerome S. Studies in Cognitive Growth: A Collaboration at the Center for Cognitive Studies. New York: Wiley,
1966.
Ginsburg, Herbert, and Sylvia Opper. Piaget’s Theory of Intellectual Development. 3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1988.
Lee, Victor, and Prajna Das Gupta. (eds.) Children’s Cognitive
and Language Development. Cambridge, MA: Blackwell
Publishers, 1995.
McShane, John. Cognitive Development: An Information Processing Approach. Oxford, Eng.: B. Blackwell, 1991.
Piaget, Jean, and Barbel Inhelder. The Growth of Logical
Thinking from Childhood to Adolescence. New York:
Basic Books, 1958.
Sameroff, Arnold J., and Marshall M. Haith. (eds.) The Five to
Seven Year Shift: The Age of Reason and Responsibility.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.

Conditioned response
In classical conditioning, behavior that is learned
in response to a particular stimulus.

Reflexive behaviors occur when an animal encounters a stimulus that naturally leads to a reflex. For example, a loud noise generates a fright response. If an initially neutral stimulus is paired with the noise, that neutral
or conditioned stimulus produces a fright response. In
144

An animal usually produces a conditioned response
to stimuli that resemble the conditioned stimulus, a
process called stimulus generalization. Balancing this is
a complementary tendency not to respond to anything
but the conditioned stimulus itself; the process of ignoring stimuli is called stimulus discrimination. The combination of generalization and discrimination leads to appropriate responses.

Conditioned stimulus
In classical conditioning, a stimulus leads to a
learned response.

In Ivan Pavlov’s experimentations with classical
conditioning, a sound was paired with the placement of
meat powder in a dog’s mouth, and the powder naturally
induced salivation. After the powder and the sound had
co-occurred a few times, the dog salivated when the
sound occurred, even when the meat powder was not administered. Although most research in classical conditioning has involved reflexive behaviors that are typically involuntary, other nonreflexive behaviors have also
been classically conditioned. The effects of the conditioned stimulus can vary widely in different circumstances. For example, if the unconditioned stimulus is
more intense, the conditioned stimulus will have a
greater effect. On the other hand, if the conditioned stimulus does not always occur when the natural, uncondi-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Conditioning

tioned stimulus does, the conditioned stimulus will have
less effect. Further, if an animal has associated a particular conditioned stimulus with a certain unconditioned
stimulus and a new conditioned stimulus is presented,
the animal will typically not develop a response to the
new conditioned stimulus. Psychologists refer to this
lack of a response to the new stimulus as blocking.
The conditioned stimulus seems to exert its effect by
providing information to the animal. If the animal has already gained information through an initial conditioned
stimulus, the second one will not be very useful. Similarly, if the potential conditioned stimulus does not always
occur with the unconditioned stimulus, the information
provided by the conditioned stimulus is less useful to the
animal. If the conditioned stimulus occurs without the
unconditioned stimulus, extinction will occur; that is,
the conditioned stimulus will no longer have an effect.
The reflex can be conditioned more easily the second
time around if the two are again paired. Sometimes, after
extinction has taken place, the conditioned stimulus will
produce the reflexive behavior without the unconditioned stimulus, a process called spontaneous recovery.
Psychologists have applied knowledge of classical
conditioning to human behavior. For example, people
with allergies may rely on drugs that have unwanted side
effects. Their allergies have been alleviated by pairing a
unique odor (the conditioned stimulus) with the drug
(the unconditioned stimulus). Over time, presentation of
the odor by itself may alleviate the allergic symptoms.
During potty training, children are conditioned to associate
the urge to urinate with sitting on the toilet. (Photo by
Elizabeth Hathon. Stock Market. Reproduced with permission.)

Conditioning
A broad term to describe techniques used by psychologists to study the process of learning.

Psychology has often been defined as the study of
behavior. As such, psychologists have developed a diverse array of methods for studying both human and animal activity. Two of the most commonly used techniques
are classical conditioning and operant conditioning.
They have been used to study the process of learning,
one of the key areas of interest to psychologists in the
early days of psychology. Psychologists also attach considerable significance to conditioning because it has
been effective in changing human and animal behavior
in predictable and desirable ways.
The Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov developed
the principles of classical conditioning. In his Nobel
Prize-winning research on the digestive processes, he
placed meat powder in the mouths of his research animals and recorded their levels of salivation. At one point,

he noticed that some of his research animals began to
salivate in the absence of food. He reasoned that the
presence of the animal caretakers led the animals to anticipate the meat powder, so they began to salivate even
without the food.
When classical conditioning occurs, an animal or
person initially responds to a naturally occurring stimulus
with a natural response (e.g., the food leads to salivation).
Then the food is systematically paired with a previously
neutral stimulus (e.g., a bell), one that does not lead to
any particular response. With repeated pairings, the natural response occurs when the neutral stimulus appears.
Pavlovian (i.e., classical) conditioning influenced psychologists greatly, even though Pavlov himself was skeptical of the work psychologists performed. In the United
States, John Watson, the first widely known behaviorist,
used the principles of classical conditioning in his research.
For example, in a widely cited study, Watson tried to develop a classically conditioned phobia in an infant.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

145

Conduct disorder

Although classical conditioning became the dominant Russian model for the study of behaviorism, another form of conditioning took hold in the United States.
This version, which became known as operant or instrumental conditioning, initially developed from the ideas
of the psychologist Edward Thorndike. Thorndike
began his psychological research by studying learning in
chickens, then in cats. Based on the problem solving of
these animals, he developed the Law of Effect, which in
simple form states that a behavior that has a positive outcome is likely to be repeated. Similarly, his Law of Exercise states that the more a response occurs in a given situation, the more strongly it is linked with that situation,
and the more likely it is to be repeated in the future.
Operant conditioning was popularized by the psychologist B.F. Skinner. His research and writings influenced not only psychologists but also the general public.
Operant conditioning differs from classical conditioning
in that, whereas classical conditioning relies on an organism’s response to some stimulus in the environment,
operant conditioning relies on the organism’s initiating
an action that is followed by some consequence.
For example, when a hungry person puts money into
a vending machine, he or she is rewarded with some
product. In psychologists’ terms, the behavior is reinforced; in everyday language, the person is satisfied with
the outcome. As a result, the next time the person is hungry, he or she is likely to repeat the behavior of putting
money into the machine. On the other hand, if the machine malfunctions and the person gets no food, that individual is less likely to repeat the behavior in the future.
This refers to punishment.
Any time a behavior leads to a positive outcome that
is likely to be repeated, psychologists say that behavior
has been reinforced. When the behavior leads to a negative outcome, psychologists refer to it as punishment.
Two types of reinforcement and punishment have been
described: positive and negative.
Positive reinforcement is generally regarded as synonymous with reward: when a behavior appears, something positive results. This leads to a greater likelihood
that the behavior will recur. Negative reinforcement involves the termination of an unpleasant situation. Thus, if
a person has a headache, taking some kind of pain reliever leads to a satisfying outcome. In the future, when the
person has a headache, he or she is likely to take that pain
reliever again. In positive and negative reinforcement,
some behavior is likely to recur either because something
positive results or something unpleasant stops.
Just as reinforcement comes in two versions, punishment takes two forms. Psychologists have identified
positive punishment as the presentation of an unpleasant
146

result when an undesired behavior occurs. On the other
hand, when something positive is removed, this is called
negative punishment. In both forms of punishment, an
undesired behavior results in a negative consequence. As
a result, the undesired behavior is less likely to recur in
the future.
Many people mistakenly equate negative reinforcement with punishment because the word “negative” conjures up the idea of punishment. In reality, a situation involving negative reinforcement involves the removal of a
negative stimulus, leading to a more satisfying situation.
A situation involving punishment always leads to an unwanted outcome.
Beginning with Watson and Skinner, psychology in
the United States adopted a behavioral framework in
which researchers began to study people and animals
through conditioning. From the 1920s through the 1960s,
many psychologists performed conditioning experiments
with animals with the idea that what was true for animals
would also be true for humans. Psychologists assumed
that the principles of conditioning were universal. Although many of the principles of learning and conditioning developed in animal research pertain to human learning and conditioning, psychologists now realize that each
species has its own behavioral characteristics. Consequently, although the principles of conditioning may generalize from animals to humans, researchers must consider the differences across species as well.
See also Aversive conditioning; Classical conditioning; Operant conditioning
Further Reading
Mackintosh, N. J. Conditioning and Associative Learning.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1983.
Walker, James T. The Psychology of Learning. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1996.

Conduct disorder
A childhood antisocial behavior disorder characterized by aggressive and destructive actions that
harm other human beings, animals, or property,
and which violate the socially expected behavior
for the child’s age.

Along with anxiety and depression, conduct disorder
is one of the most frequently diagnosed childhood psychological disorders. Depending on the population, rates
of the disorder range from 6-16% in males and 2-9% in
females and are expected to increase as antisocial behavior increases. Symptoms of conduct disorder include aggression, destruction of property, deceitfulness or theft,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Depending on the age it first appears, two forms of
conduct disorder are identified: childhood-onset type and
adolescent-onset type. In childhood-onset conduct disorder, the individual, usually a male, will have exhibited at
least one criteria for the disorder before age 10 and will
usually have full-blown conduct disorder by puberty.
These children are more likely to develop adult antisocial personality disorder. Adolescent-onset conduct
disorder tends to be milder, with no exhibiting symptoms
before age 10. Adolescents with this type of conduct disorder are only slightly more frequently male than female, have more normal peer relationships, and are less
likely to progress to antisocial personality disorder as
adults. Their antisocial behaviors may be much more
marked when in the presence of others.

Diagnosis
According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM IV), conduct disorder is present when a child or adolescent (1) repetitively violates
the rights of others or violates age-appropriate social
norms and rules, and (2) this pattern of behavior causes
significant impairment in social, academic, or occupational functioning. Three or more of the following criteria must have been present within the past 12 months,
with one present within the past six months:

Aggression
The child or adolescent:
• bullies, threatens, or intimidates others;
• initiates physical fights;
• uses a weapon with potential to cause serious harm;
• is physically cruel to people;
• is physically cruel to animals;
• steals while confronting the victim (mugging, extortion, robbery);
• forces another person into sexual activity.

Destruction of property
The child or adolescent:
• deliberately engages in fire-setting with the intention of
doing serious damage;
• deliberately destroys others’ property (other than by
fire).

Deceitfulness or theft
The child or adolescent:
• breaks into someone else’s house, building, or car;
• lies to obtain goods, favors, or to avoid obligations;
• steals objects of non-trivial value without confronting
the victim.

Serious violations of rules
The child or adolescent:
• stays out late at night against parental prohibition before age 13;
• runs away once for a lengthy period of time or twice
overnight;
• is truant from school before age 13.
Because children and adolescents with conduct disorder often attempt to minimize the seriousness of their
behavior, diagnosis is based on observations by parents,
teachers, other authorities, peers, and by victims of the
child’s abuse. Generally, the child will present an exterior of toughness which actually conceals low self-esteem,
and will demonstrate little empathy for the feelings of
others or remorse for his or her actions. The disorder is
associated with early sexual activity, substance abuse,
reckless acts, and suicidal ideation. Chronic health problems, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, poverty,
family conflict or a family history of alcohol dependence, mood disorders, antisocial disorders, and schizophrenia are also linked to the disorder.
There is some concern that the behaviors associated
with conduct disorder may potentially be considered
“normal” responses in the context of certain highly violent social conditions, for example war-zones (a concern
when treating some immigrants) and high-crime urban
neighborhoods. In these areas, the routine threats posed
to life and property may encourage aggressive and deceptive behaviors as protective responses. Thus, the social and economic context in which the behaviors occurred should be taken into account, and in some cases a
model based on trauma may be helpful.
A majority of children with conduct disorder no
longer exhibit the extreme behaviors by the time they
reach adulthood, but a substantial number do go on to

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

147

Conduct disorder

and serious violations of rules. The specific manner in
which these activities are carried out may vary with age as
cognitive and physical development occur. The child may
exhibit opposition to authority (characteristic of oppositional-defiant disorder) during early childhood, gradually adopt the more serious behaviors of lying, shoplifting,
and fighting during school age years, and then develop the
most extreme behaviors such as burglary, confrontative
theft, and rape during puberty and teenage years. Males
tend to demonstrate more confrontative behaviors, such as
fighting, theft, vandalism, and discipline problems, than
females, who are more likely demonstrate lying, truancy,
substance abuse, and prostitution.

Conflict resolution

develop antisocial personality disorder. For information
about treatment, see entry on antisocial behavior.
See also Antisocial behavior; Oppositional-defiant
disorder
Further Reading
Kazdin, Alan E. Conduct Disorders in Childhood and Adolescence. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 1995.
Kernberg, Paulina F., et al. Children with Conduct Disorders:
A Psychotherapy Manual. New York: Basic Books, 1991.
Sholevar, G. Pirooz, ed. Conduct Disorders in Children and
Adolescents. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Press, 1995.

Further Information
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 3615
Wisconsin Avenue, NW, Washington, DC 20016-3007,
(202) 966–7300. http://www.aacap.org. (A professional
association whose mission includes educating parents and
families about psychiatric disorders affecting children and
adolescents, educating child and adolescent psychiatrists,
and developing guidelines for treatment of childhood and
adolescent mental health disorders.)
The Federation of Families for Children’s Mental Health. 1021
Prince Street, Alexandria, VA 22314–2971, (703)6847710 (A national parent-run organization focused on the
needs of children and youth with emotional, behavioral,
or mental disorders and their families.)

Conflict resolution
The process of defusing antagonism and reaching
agreement between conflicting parties, especially
through some form of negotiation. Also, the study
and practice of solving interpersonal and intergroup conflict.

“Conflict” from the Latin root “to strike together”
can be defined as any situation where incompatible activities, feelings, or intentions occur together. Conflict
may take place within one person, between two or more
people who know each other, or between large groups of
people who do not know each other. It may involve actual confrontation between persons, or merely symbolic
confrontation through words and deeds. The conflict
may be expressed through verbal denigration, accusations, threats, or through physical violence to persons or
property. Or the conflict may remain unexpressed, as in
avoidance and denial.
A given conflict may be defined in terms of the issues that caused it, the strategies used to address it, or
the outcomes or consequences that follow from it. The
issues of the conflict may be varied, ranging from the
simple to the complex. Strategies for resolving or pre148

venting the development of conflict can be classified as
avoidance, diffusion, or confrontation. Turning on the
TV rather than discussing an argument is a form of
avoidance. Two workers who talk to their boss about a
dispute is an example of diffusion. Insulting a person or
physically harming someone are examples of confrontation. Courtroom litigation, like the trial and indictment
of a person who has violated the law, also represents a
form of confrontation.
The phrase conflict resolution refers specifically to
strategies of diffusion developed during the second half
of the twentieth century as alternatives to traditional litigation models of settling disputes. Based on the idea that
it is better to expose and resolve conflict before it damages people’s relationships or escalates into violence,
methods of conflict resolution were developed in business management and gradually adopted in the fields of
international relations, legal settings, and, during the
1980s, educational settings. Conflict resolution in education includes any strategy that promotes handling disputes peacefully and cooperatively outside of, or in addition to, traditional disciplinary procedures. The rise of
violence and disciplinary problems, along with an increasing awareness of need for behavioral as well as
cognitive instruction, spurred the development of conflict resolution programs in schools during the 1980s.
These programs received national attention in 1984 with
the formation of the National Association for Mediation
in Education (NAME). By the late 1990s most major
cities had instituted some form of large-scale conflict
resolution program. According to a 1994 National
School Boards study, 61% of schools had some form of
conflict resolution program.
Most conflict resolution programs employ some form
of negotiation as the primary method of communication
between parties. In the negotiation process, parties with
opposing interests hold conversations to settle a dispute.
Negotiation can be distributive, where each party attempts
to win as many concessions to his or her own self-interest
as possible (win-lose), or integrative, where parties attempt to discover solutions that embody mutual self-interest (win-win). Research on games theory and the decisionmaking process suggest that the face-to-face conversation
involved in direct negotiation may actually influence people to act in the interest of the group (including the opposing party), or some other interest beyond immediate selfinterest. Certainly the simple act of talking with the opposition sends a message that the parties are committed to
positive resolution, and face-to-face negotiation inherently
tends to be integrative in its consequences.
The success of a given instance of conflict resolution depends on the attitudes and skills of the disputants
and of the mediator or arbitrator. In the workplace, for

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Conformity

example, two people may have different ideas about how
to accomplish a project. If one person decides to begin
the project without the input of the other person, this person’s attitude has already jeopardized the conflict resolution process. It is the mediator’s role to clearly lay out
the issues of the conflict and to help the disputants arrive
at the appropriate response to the conflict. There are several responses to a conflict: withdrawing from a conflict;
demanding or requesting the opposing party to concede;
providing reasons the opposing party should concede
(appealing to norms); proposing alternatives to the opposing party; and proposing “if” statements, suggesting
willingness to negotiate. Perspective taking, or articulating and validating the feelings and thoughts of the other
party (“I see that you want….”), reflects the higher orders of conflict resolution skills. Integration of interests
(“We both want…”) reflects the highest level, leading to
a consensual settlement of negotiations. According to the
principles of conflict resolution, the only true solution to
a conflict is one that attempts to satisfy the inherent
needs of all the parties involved.
Further Reading
Deutsch, M. The Resolution of Conflict: Constructive and Destructive Processes. New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press, 1989.
Girard, K. and S. Koch. Conflict Resolution in the Schools: A
Manual for Educators. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, Inc.,
1996.

These troubled teens are in a military-style camp, where
conformity and compliance work to make them adhere to
social norms. (Photo by Pete Cosgrove. UPI/Corbis-Bettmann.
Reproduced with permission.)

Further Information
Institute for Mediation and Conflict Resolution (IMCR). Automation House, 4th Floor, 49 East 68th St., New York,
NY 10021.
National Institute for Dispute Resolution. 1726 M Street, NW,
Suite 500, Washington, DC 20036, (202) 466–4764.

Conformity
Adaptation of one’s behavior or beliefs to match
those of the other members of a group.

Conformity describes the adaptation of behavior
that occurs in response to unspoken group pressure. It
differs from compliance, which is adaptation of behavior
resulting from overt pressure. Individuals conform to or
comply with group behavior in an attempt to “fit in” or
to follow the norms of the social group. In most cases,
conforming to social norms is so natural that people
aren’t even aware they are doing it unless someone calls
it to their attention or violates the norms.
Researchers have studied conformity using controlled experiments. The first classic experiment in con-

formity was carried out in the 1930s by Muzafer Sherif.
It made use of an optical illusion called the autokinetic
phenomenon—the fact that a small stationary point of
light in a darkened room will appear to move. The autokinetic phenomenon affects individuals differently, i.e.,
the amount of movement experienced by different people varies. In Sherif’s experiment, several subjects were
placed together in a room with a stationary light. Each
was asked to describe its movement aloud. As the individuals listened to the descriptions of others, their answers became increasingly similar as they unconsciously
sought to establish a group norm. The power of social
norms was demonstrated even more strikingly when the
subjects continued to adhere to the norm later when they
were retested individually. Sherif’s experiment demonstrates one of the important conditions that produces
conformity: ambiguity. There was no clear-cut right answer to the question asked of the subjects, so they were
more vulnerable to reliance on a norm.
In the 1950s another researcher, Solomon Asch, devised a conformity experiment that eliminated the ambiguity factor. Subjects were asked to match lines of different lengths on two cards. In this experiment, there was

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

149

Conscience

one obvious right answer. However, each subject was
tested in a room full of “planted” peers who deliberately
gave the wrong answer in some cases. About threefourths of the subjects tested knowingly gave an incorrect
answer at least once in order to conform to the group.
Asch’s experiment revealed other factors—notably
unanimity and size of the majority—that influence conformity even when ambiguity isn’t an issue. Unanimity of
opinion is extremely powerful in influencing people to go
along with the group. Even one dissenter decreases the
incidence of conformity markedly. Individuals are much
more likely to diverge from a group when there is at least
one other person to share the potential disapproval of the
group. People who follow the lead of an initial dissenter
may even disagree with that person and be dissenting
from the group for a totally different reason. However,
knowing there is at least one other dissenting voice makes
it easier for them to express their own opinions.
Individual differences also determine the degree to
which conformity will occur. Although the ambiguity
and unanimity of the situation are powerful contributors
to the incidence of conformity, they are not the sole determinants. Personal characteristics and the individual’s
position within the group play a role as well. Individuals
who have a low status within a group or are unfamiliar
with a particular situation are the ones most likely to
conform. Thus, students who are new to a class, new
members of a study or activity group, or new residents to
a community are more likely to be affected by the pressure to conform. Personality traits, such as concern
with being liked or the desire to be right, also play a role.
Cultural factors are also influential. Certain cultures
are more likely than others to value group harmony over
individual expression. In fact, school administrators, organization managers, and even parents can establish an
atmosphere or “culture” that either fosters conformity or
allows for dissension and individuality.
Further Reading
Feller, Robyn M. Everything You Need to Know About Peer
Pressure. New York: Rosen Publishing Group, 1995.
Friar, Linda and Penelope B. Grenoble. Teaching Your Child to
Handle Peer Pressure. Chicago: Contemporary Books, 1988.
Goldhammer, John. Under the Influence: The Destructive Effects of Group Dynamics. Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books, 1996.

Conscience
The moral dimension of human consciousness, the
means by which humans modify instinctual drives
to conform to laws and moral codes.
150

Sigmund Freud viewed the conscience as one of
two components of the superego, the other being the
ego-ideal. In this scheme, the conscience prevents people
from doing things that are morally wrong, and the egoideal motivates people to do things that are considered
morally right. This theory suggests that the conscience is
developed by parents, who convey their beliefs to their
children. They in turn internalize these moral codes by a
process of identification with a parent.
Other psychologists have proposed different theories about the development of the conscience.
See also Moral development
Further Reading
Weissbud, Bernice. “How Kids Develop a Conscience.” Parents’ Magazine (December 1991): 156.

Consciousness
Awareness of external stimuli and of one’s own
mental activity.

Wilhelm Wundt’s investigations of consciousness,
begun in 1879, were central to the development of psychology as a field of study. Wundt’s approach, called
structuralism, sought to determine the structure of consciousness by recording the verbal descriptions provided
by laboratory subjects to various stimuli, a method that
became known as introspection. The next major approach to the study of consciousness was the functionalism of William James, who focused on how consciousness helps people adapt to their environment. Behaviorism, pioneered by John B. Watson in the early 1900s,
shifted interest from conscious processes to observable
behaviors, and the study of consciousness faded into the
background for almost half a century, especially in the
United States, until it was revived by the “cognitive revolution” that began in the 1950s and 1960s.
The existence of different levels of consciousness
was at the heart of Sigmund Freud’s model of human
mental functioning. In addition to the conscious level,
consisting of thoughts and feelings of which one is
aware, Freud proposed the existence of the unconscious,
a repository for thoughts and feelings that are repressed
because they are painful or unacceptable to the conscious mind for some other reason. He also formulated
the concept of the preconscious, which functions as an
intermediate or transitional level of mind between the
unconscious and the conscious. A preconscious thought
can quickly become conscious by receiving attention,
and a conscious thought can slip into the preconscious

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

People experience not only different levels, but also
different states of consciousness, ranging from wakefulness (which may be either active or passive) to deep
sleep. Although sleep suspends the voluntary exercise of
both bodily functions and consciousness, it is a much
more active state than was once thought. Tracking brain
waves with the aid of electroencephalograms (EEGs), researchers have identified six stages of sleep (including a
pre-sleep stage), each characterized by distinctive brainwave frequencies. In rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep, which makes up 20% of sleep time, the same fastfrequency, low-amplitude beta waves that characterize
waking states occur, and a person’s physiological
signs—heart rate, breathing, and blood pressure—also
resemble those of a waking state. It is during REM sleep
that dreams are experienced. Delta waves demarcate the
deepest levels of sleep, when heart rate, respiration, temperature, and blood flow to the brain are reduced and
growth hormone is secreted.
Certain waking states, which are accompanied by
marked changes in mental processes, are considered
states of altered consciousness. One of these is hypnosis,
a highly responsive state induced by a hypnotist through
the use of special techniques. While the term “hypnosis”
comes from the Greek word for sleep (hypnos), hypnotized people are not really asleep. Their condition resembles sleep in that they are relaxed and out of touch with
ordinary environmental demands, but their minds remain
active and conscious. Other characteristics of hypnosis
include lack of initiative, selective redistribution of attention, enhanced ability to fantasize, reduced reality
testing, and increased suggestibility. Also, hypnosis is
often followed by post-hypnotic amnesia, in which the
person is unable to remember what happened during the
hypnotic session. Hypnosis has proven useful in preventing or controlling various types of pain, including pain
from dental work, childbirth, burns, arthritis, nerve damage, and migraine headaches.

In meditation, an altered state of consciousness is
achieved by performing certain rituals and exercises.
Typical characteristics of the meditative state include intensified perception, an altered sense of time, decreased
distraction from external stimuli, and a sense that the experience is pleasurable and rewarding. While meditation
is traditionally associated with Zen Buddhism, a secular
form called Transcendental Meditation (TM) has been
widely used in the United States for purposes of relaxation. It has been found that during this type of meditation, people consume less oxygen, eliminate less carbon
dioxide, and breathe more slowly than when they are in
an ordinary resting state.
Consciousness may be altered in a dramatic fashion
by the use of psychoactive drugs, which affect the interaction of neurotransmitters and receptors in the brain.
They include illegal “street drugs,” tranquilizers and
other prescription medications, and such familiar substances as alcohol, tobacco, and coffee. The major categories of psychoactive drugs include depressants, which
reduce activity of the central nervous system; sedatives,
another type of depressant that includes barbiturates
such as Seconal and Nembutal; anxiolytics (traditionally
referred to as tranquilizers); narcotics—including heroin
and its derivatives—which are addictive drugs that cause
both drowsiness and euphoria, and are also pain-killers;
psychostimulants, such as amphetamines and cocaine,
which stimulate alertness, increase excitability, and elevate moods; and psychedelics or hallucinogens, such as
marijuana and LSD. Psychedelics, which affect moods,
thought, memory, and perception, are particularly
known for their consciousness-altering properties. They
can produce distortion of one’s body image, loss of
identity, dreamlike fantasies, and hallucinations. LSD
(lysergic acid diethylamide), one of the most powerful
psychedelic drugs, can cause hallucinations in which
time is distorted, sounds produce visual sensations, and
an out-of-body feeling is experienced.
Various states of consciousness are viewed differently by different cultures and even subcultures. In the
United States, for example, hallucinations are devalued
by mainstream culture as a bizarre sign of insanity,
whereas the youth counterculture of the 1960s viewed
drug-induced hallucinations as enlightening, “mind-expanding” experiences. In certain other societies, hallucinations are respected as an important therapeutic tool
used by ritual healers.
Further Reading
Dennett, D.C. Brainstorms. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books,
1980.
Freud, Sigmund. “The Unconscious.” In The Standard Edition
of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud.
London: Hogarth Press, 1962.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

151

Consciousness

when attention is withdrawn from it. In contrast, the repressed material contained in the unconscious can only
be retrieved through some special technique, such as
hypnosis or dream interpretation. (What Freud called the
unconscious is today referred to by many psychologists
as the subconscious.) Freud’s contemporary, Carl Jung,
posited the existence of a collective unconscious shared
by all people which gathers together the experiences of
previous generations. The collective unconscious contains images and symbols, called archetypes, that Jung
found are shared by people of diverse cultures and tend
to emerge in dreams, myths, and other forms. In Jung’s
view, a thorough analysis of both the personal and collective unconscious was necessary to fully understand
the individual personality.

Consumer psychology

What the consumer wants

Consumer psychology
The study of the behavior of consumers of goods
and services regarding their buying patterns and reactions to advertising and marketing.

Consumer psychology seeks to explain human, or
consumer behavior, in two basic ways: what the consumer wants and what the consumer needs. The logical
explanation for fulfilling the needs is a simple one. If a
person lives in New York, that person needs a winter
coat to survive the cold outside. But why the person
buys a particular style or color hinges on the more complex issues of why a particular choice is made. The Society for Consumer Psychology is a division of the
American Psychological Association (APA). The
group’s main focus is conducting scientific research,
development and practice in the field. Its quarterly
journal, Journal of Consumer Psychology as well as another publication, Journal of Consumer Research and
Psychology and Marketing, periodically serves as the
voice of those engaged in the understanding of why
people buy what they buy.

The key to unlocking consumer psychology is understanding that desires rule over needs when it comes to consumer purchase. In a modern world with hundreds of
brands of toothpaste, where new food products and electronic gadgets emerge daily, it is the interest of psychologists, as well as those marketing the products, to understand the relationship between financial and psychological
factors that make people buy what they buy. In fact, consumer psychology utilizes more than simply psychology. It
must study economics and culture too. Accordingly, there
are several principles at play when examining this issue.
Psychology views certain factors that include: 1) The
Gestalt principle. If you want to know why a particular
restaurant is popular, it is important to understand what
cultural implications are present beside the food; 2) The
Iceberg principle. What could be the superficial or seemingly rational reason a person might have for making a
purchase (the need)? What other factors (wants) influence
it? For instance, even if shoes are purchased as foot protection, the desired shoe may be open-toed, strapless, and
come with six- inch heels; 3) The Dynamic principle.

Consumer psychology studies issues like why the need for transportation is coupled with the want for a luxury vehicle, like
this BMW. (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with permission.)

152

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

What consumer psychologists know
In 1957, a writer named Vance Packard started a
minor revolution with his book, The Hidden Persuader.
Packard uncovered the manipulations of the advertising
community, done to ensure a certain brand of a product
becomes a best-selling item. He urged consumers to be
cautious and not fall prey to hidden meanings or symbols
in advertising, and pointed out less-than-honest representations of what a product could do for the buyer. The
book was popular, and people started looking for the
subtle messages in everything from liquor ads to
spaghetti packages. What they also did, and often, is buy
the product anyway. Their awareness did not necessarily
combat their emotional needs.
Psychologists understand that in the burgeoning economy of the early twenty-first century people’s needs and
wants are continually growing too. In the 1970s and early
1980s, household items such as computers and video
recorders were new, and counted as luxuries. By 1999, by
virtue of a changing society, those items had become more
than simple luxuries, as schools and businesses often came
to require their use. Complex human behavior can take one
invention and create a hierarchy of needs around it. Whereas economists or marketing strategists might look to numbers—wages or interest levels—psychologists know that
something more motivates the consumer purchase trends.
They have discovered that often in the most depressed economic times, the sales of luxury items go up.
Consumer psychology is a pursuit that is likely to expand now that an estimated $5 billion worth of products
were purchased online by the spring of 2000. Online shopping habits might differ drastically from catalogue sales or
in-store purchases. These trends are just beginning to be
studied, and certainly consumer psychologists will be
studying buying habits well into the twenty-first century.

Bidlake, Suzanne. “Scents of real purpose.” Marketing, (October 15, 1992).
Dawar, Niraj. “Product-harm crises and the signaling ability of
brands.” International Studies of management & Organization, (Fall 1998).
Dichter, E. “Consumer Psychology.” In Encyclopedia of Psychology, Second Edition. Ray Corsini, ed. New York: John
Wiley & Sons 1994.
Krugman, Herbert E. “Pavlov’s dog and the future of consumer
psychology.” Journal of Advertising Research, (Nov-Dec
1994).
LaFreniere, Andrea. “Buyer psychology, consumer confidence:
how to post sales in today’s marketplace (housing market).” Professional Builder and Remodeler, (May 1,
1991).
McKenna, Joseph F. “Brand management: just do it.” Industry
Week, (March 20, 1995).

Further Information
Society for Consumer Psychology of the American Psychological Association. c/o 313 Commerce West Building, 1206
South 6th Street, Champaign, IL, USA. 61820, (217) 3334550.

Contrast
The relative difference in intensity between two
stimuli and their effect on each other.

Contrast, or contrast effect, is the effect a visual
stimulus has on another. When one stimulus is present, it
affects the other. As can be seen in this illustration, two
gray boxes of equal intensity are surrounded by, in one
case, a white field, and in the other, a black field. The perceived shade of gray is affected by the contrasting field.
Psychologists also study the contrast threshold, the
point at which differences in two stimuli can be detected.
These tests are used in the study of visual perception
and the ability to perceive spatial relationships. Understanding contrast effect has practical applications. For
example, black and yellow have the lowest contrast effect, which means the largest percentage of the population can clearly detect the difference between these two
colors. Therefore, black and yellow are the colors used
to mark school buses and many traffic signs.

Jane Spear

Control group
Further Reading
Asker, Jennifer L. “The malleable self: the role of self- expression in persuasion.” Journal of Marketing Research, (February 1999).
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In an experiment that focuses on the effects of a
single condition or variable, the group that is exposed to all the conditions or variables except the
one being studied.
153

Control group

People and their motivations constantly change, whether
influenced by social, economic, or psychological factors.
The millionaire who grew up in dire poverty might still
buy the cheapest margarine because the psychological
motivation takes time to catch up to the economic status;
and 4) Image and Symbolism. From product spokespersons to the picture on a candy bar wrapper, the ever-elusive association people make with a product might be a
big factor in whether or not they buy it, more than the nature or quality of the product itself.

Convergent thinking

Scientists often study how a particular condition or
factor influences an outcome. In such an experiment, in
which there are two groups of subjects, the group that is
exposed to the condition or factor is called the experimental group. The other group, which provides a basis
for comparison, is called the control group. For example,
in a hypothetical study of the influence of the presence
of loud music on the test performances of children, the
control group would consist of the group of children not
exposed to the loud music during the test. Their test
scores would be compared with the experimental group,
the group of children who were exposed to loud music
during the test. In this type of experimental design, subjects would be randomly assigned to each group to ensure a reliable comparison.
Further Reading
Atkinson, Rita L.; Richard C. Atkinson; Edward E. Smith; and
Ernest R. Hilgard. Introduction to Psychology. 9th ed. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. 12th ed. Glenview,
IL: Scott, Foresman, 1988.

Convergent thinking
The ability to narrow the number of possible solutions to a problem by applying logic and knowledge.

The term convergent thinking was coined J. P. Guilford, a psychologist well-known for his research on creativity. Guilford posited that a prime component of creativity is divergent thinking, the capacity to arrive at
unique and original solutions and the tendency to consider problems in terms of multiple solutions rather than
just one. Convergent thinking, which narrows all options
to one solution, corresponds closely to the types of tasks
usually called for in school and on standardized multiple-choice tests. In contrast, creativity tests designed to
assess divergent thinking often ask how many different
answers or solutions a person can think of to a specific
question or problem. Some researchers have claimed that
creative achievement actually involves both divergent
and convergent thinking—divergent thinking to generate
new ideas and convergent thinking to “reality test” them
in order to determine if they will work.
Further Reading
Amabile, Teresa M. Growing Up Creative: Nurturing a Lifetime of Creativity. New York: Crown Publishers, 1989.
Guilford, J. P. The Nature of Human Intelligence. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1967.
154

Conversion reaction
A psychological disorder characterized by physical
symptoms for which no physiological cause can be
found.

This condition was first described by Sigmund
Freud as conversion hysteria because it involved the
conversion of a repressed emotional problem to a physiological form. Today, conversion reaction is classified as
a somatoform disorder in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV ).
Conversion reaction is a very rare condition, accounting for about 2 percent of all psychiatric diagnoses, and usually first appears during adolescence or
early adulthood, generally when an individual is under
severe stress. Symptoms tend to be both specific and severe, and generally interferes with daily activities. A
conversion disorder may serve as a way for a patient to
avoid activities or situations associated with a source of
emotional conflict or even shut down conscious awareness of the conflict itself. Another source of “secondary
gain” is the attraction of attention, sympathy, and support that the patient may need but is unable to obtain in
other ways.
Some of the most common symptoms of conversion
disorder are paralysis, blindness or tunnel vision,
seizures, loss of sensation, and disturbance of coordinated movements, such as walking. Other physical complaints include tremors, abdominal pain, and speech impairments such as aphonia, the inability to speak above
a whisper. Sometimes a person will experience anesthesia in only one part of the body, such as “glove anesthesia,” which affects the hand only up to the wrist, although such a problem could have no physiological origin since there is no cut-off point between the nerves of
the hand and arm. Symptoms may also involve the endocrine glands or autonomic nervous systems. If the
symptoms of a conversion disorder are prolonged, they
may produce physiological damage by interrupting the
normal functioning of the body, and psychological
damage by inducing excessive dependence on family
members and other persons.
Further Reading
Freud, Sigmund. The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. London: Hogarth
Press, 1962.
——-. Dora: An Analysis of a Case of Hysteria. New York:
Collier, 1963.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

A technique used to measure the likelihood of two
behaviors relating to each other.

See also Research methodology; Scientific method
Psychologists are often interested in deciding
whether two behaviors tend to occur together. One
means of making this assessment involves using correlations. Sometimes two measurements are associated so
that when the value of one increases, so does the other—
a positive correlation. On the other hand, one value may
increase systematically as the other decreases—a negative correlation.

Cortex
See Neocortex

For example, the number of correct answers on a student’s test is generally positively related to the number of
hours spent studying. Students who produce more correct
answers have spent more hours studying; similarly, fewer
correct answers occur with fewer hours spent studying.
One could also see whether the number of wrong
answers on a test is associated with study time. This pattern is likely to produce a negative correlation: a greater
number of wrong answers is associated with less study
time. That is, the value of one variable increases (wrong
answers) as the other decreases (hours spent studying).
Correlations allow an assessment of whether two
variables are systematically related within a group of individuals. A single person may show behavior that differs from most of the rest of the group. For example, a
given student might study for many hours and still not
perform well on a test. This does not mean that study
time and test grades are not related; it only means that
exceptions exist for individuals, even if the rest of the
group is predictable.
It is critical to remember that correlational approaches do not allow us to make statements about causation.
Thus, greater study time may not necessarily cause higher grades. Students who are interested in a particular subject do better because of their interest; they also study
more because they like the material. It may be their interest that is more important than the study time. One of the
limitations of the correlational method is that although
one variable (such as study time) may have a causal role
on the other (such as test scores), one does not know that
for certain because some other important factor (such as
interest in the material) may be the most important element associated with both greater study time and higher
test scores. When a third element is responsible for both
variables (increase in study time and increase in grades),
psychologists refer to this as the third variable problem.
The British scientist Sir Francis Galton developed
the concept of the correlational method. The British sta-

Counseling psychology
An area of psychology which focuses on nurturing
the development potential of relatively healthy individuals in all areas of their lives.

While the counseling psychologist may diagnose,
assess, and treat adjustment difficulties, they often address problems which are more moderate than those encountered by the clinical psychologist. Clients of counseling psychologists are people who need help coping
with the stresses of everyday life, and the focus is on
strengthening their existing resources rather than overcoming disorders or deficits in particular areas. The
counseling psychologist may use a number of tools in
treating clients, including psychotherapy, workshops in
such areas as assertiveness training or communications
skills, and psychological assessments . These tests are
used to measure a person’s aptitudes, interests, or personality characteristics and provide feedback which can
facilitate the counseling process. Clients may be treated
individually, in group therapy, or in family groups, depending on the nature of the problems and the specialization of the counselor. In contrast to a clinical psychotherapist, the counseling psychologist may intervene in the
client’s immediate environment. Also, unlike traditional
psychotherapy, the relationship between counselor and
client may extend to situations outside the office setting.
Counseling psychology has its roots in education
and vocational guidance and has been closely linked
with the use of mental testing, which is central to these
fields. It has traditionally followed an educational rather
than a medical model, considering those it helps as
clients rather than patients. Its educational context is also
evident in its emphasis on developmental models derived
from the work of Erik Erikson, Robert Havighurst,
Daniel Levinson, Roger Gould, and other theorists.
Counseling psychologists work on helping clients re-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

155

Counseling psychology

Correlational method

tistician Karl Pearson (1857-1936) worked out the mathematical formulation. There are several different types of
correlations; the most commonly used is called the Pearson Product-Moment Correlation.

Counterconditioning

move obstacles to optimal development. A focus on adult
development is helpful to many types of clients, such as
women returning to the work force, or individuals undertaking second careers. Counseling psychology, paralleling a growing trend among health care providers, also
advocates preventive as well remedial approaches to
problems, seeking to identify “at risk” individuals and
groups and intervene before a crisis occurs.
Of the psychotherapeutic models available to counseling psychology at its inception in the 1940s, Rogerian,
or client-centered therapy has had the most influence.
Carl Rogers, whose methods were more readily understood and adapted by counselors than those of Sigmund
Freud, had a lasting influence on the techniques of vocational counseling and counseling psychology, which
focus more on the process than on the outcome of the
counseling relationship. Two other theoretical models
that have been especially influential are decision-making
theory and the social influence model. The former attempts to teach clients procedures and strategies for effective decision making, including such techniques as
weighing the factors in a decision according to a numerical point system. Decision-making is related to counseling psychology’s overall emphasis on problem solving.
Social influence theory, currently one of the prevailing theories in the field, involves the counselor’s influence over the client based on how the client perceives
him or her in terms of such factors as credibility and degree of expertise. Researchers have studied the behaviors
that contribute to the counselor’s social influence; the
ways in which social influence can be maximized; and
social influence in relation to such factors as race, gender, age, and social class. Over the years, the fields of
counseling psychology and psychotherapy have begun to
overlap as clinical psychologists have concentrated more
on relatively healthy clients and counselors have grown
to rely more heavily on psychotherapeutic techniques.
There has also been a growing overlap between counseling and social work, as social workers have moved in the
direction of therapeutic counseling themselves. Thus,
there has been an overlap between these professions.
Most counselor training programs are offered by
colleges of education rather than psychology departments. As the establishment of credentials has become
more and more important (particularly with regard to
payments by insurance companies), counseling psychology programs are offering (and requiring) an increased
amount of training in basic psychology, which can include rigorous internship programs. Counseling psychology has its own division, Division 17, of the American
Psychological Association, and its own professional
publications, including The Counseling Psychologist, a
156

quarterly, and the Journal of Counseling Psychology,
which appears bimonthly.
Further Reading
Brammer, Lawrence M. Therapeutic Psychology: Fundamentals of Counseling and Psychotherapy. 5th ed. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1989.
Ronch, Judah L, William van Ornum, and Nicholas C. Stilwell,
eds. The Counseling Sourcebook: A Practical Reference
on Contemporary Issues. New York: Crossroad, 1994.
Vernon, Ann, ed. Counseling Children and Adolescents. Denver, CO: Love, 1993.

Counterconditioning
An aspect of behavior therapy that involves weakening or eliminating an undesired response by introducing and strengthening a second response
that is incompatible with it.

The type of counterconditioning most widely used
for therapeutic purposes is systematic desensitization,
which is employed to reduce or eliminate fear of a particular object, situation, or activity. An early example of
systematic desensitization was an experiment that is also
the first recorded use of behavior therapy with a child.
In a paper published in 1924, Mary Cover Jones, a student of the pioneering American behaviorist John Watson, described her treatment of a three-year-old with a
fear of rabbits. Jones countered the child’s negative response to rabbits with a positive one by exposing him to
a caged rabbit while he sat some distance away, eating
one of his favorite foods. The boy slowly became more
comfortable with the rabbit as the cage was gradually
moved closer, until he was finally able to pet it and play
with it without experiencing any fear.
In the 1950s South African psychiatrist Joseph
Wolpe (1915- ) pioneered a prototype for systematic desensitization as it is generally practiced today. Like
Cover’s experiment, Wolpe’s technique involved gradually increasing the intensity of exposure to a feared experience. However, instead of countering the fear with a pleasurable stimulus such as food, Wolpe countered it with
deliberately induced feelings of relaxation. He had the
client imagine a variety of frightening experiences and
then rank them in order of intensity. The client was then
trained in deep muscle relaxation and instructed to practice it as he pictured the experiences he had described,
progressing gradually from the least to the most frightening. Today systemic desensitization of the type pioneered
by Wolpe is widely used with both adults and children. In
adults its uses range from combating phobias, such as a
fear of snakes or flying, to increasing tolerance of pain

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Another type of counterconditioning is aversive
conditioning, which makes a particular behavior less appealing by pairing it with an unpleasant stimulus. Aversive conditioning has been used in adults to break addictions to substances such as tobacco and alcohol. Alcoholics are sometimes given an alcoholic drink together
with a drug that induces nausea to weaken the positive
feelings they associate with drinking.

vantages. For example, when treating exhibitionists, it
would be difficult to justify encouraging people to expose themselves to others while a therapist administered
a shock or some other unpleasant stimulus. It is important to note that aversion therapy is not the only way to
break bad habits. Large-scale studies comparing several
methods have found that other techniques, such as behavioral family counseling and self-management techniques, are also effective.
Timothy Moore
Further Reading

Covert sensitization
An aversion therapy that reduces unwanted behaviors by repeated, imagined associations with an unpleasant consequence.

Covert sensitization was first described in the mid1960s by psychologist Joseph Cautela as a new treatment for people who engage in undesirable behaviors. In
the past 30 years it has been researched as a treatment
for alcoholism, smoking, obesity, and various sexual deviations including pedophilia and exhibitionism.
Covert sensitization discourages people from engaging in unwanted behaviors by creating an association between those behaviors and an unpleasant consequence.
Because of this, it is classified as a type of aversion therapy. What is unique about covert sensitization, however,
is that the unwanted consequence is never actually present in therapy. This is best illustrated with an example.
If a person was undergoing covert sensitization to stop
using alcohol, for instance, a typical therapy session
would involve the therapist instructing the client to
imagine himself drinking and becoming very nauseous.
Then the client would be encouraged to imagine himself
becoming so nauseous that he starts vomiting all over
himself, the room he is in, and in the beer mug from
which he was drinking. By imagining this disgusting
scene over and over again, the client starts associating alcohol with vomit, and drinking becomes much less appealing. Finally, the therapist would instruct the client to
imagine accepting a drink, becoming nauseous again,
and then deciding to refuse the drink. In the imagined
scene, the nausea (which is an unpleasant stimulus for
almost everyone) goes away as a consequence of the
client’s choice not to drink.
The major advantage covert sensitization has over
other methods of aversion therapy is that it works without the presence of the unwanted behavior and the unpleasant consequence. This has practical and ethical ad-

Rimmele, C., Howard, M., & Hilfrink, M. “Aversion Therapies.” In Hester, R., Miller, W., et al., eds. Handbook of
Alcoholism Treatment Approaches: Effective Alternatives.
Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 134-147,1995
Plaud, J. & Gaither, G. “A clinical investigation of the possible
effects of long-term habituation of sexual arousal in assisted covert sensitization.” Journal of Behavior Therapy
and Experimental Psychiatry, 28 no. 4 (1997): 281-290.

Creativity
The ability to juxtapose ideas in a new and unusual
way to find solutions to problems, create new inventions, or produce works of art.

Any human endeavor can involve creativity and is
not limited to just the arts. Numerous theories of creativity were proposed by 20th-century psychologists, educators and other social scientists. Howard Gruber, who
worked to understand creativity by studying the lives of
famous innovators, found broad common characteristics:
1) they engaged in a variety of activities within their chosen fields; 2) they held a strong sense of purpose about
their work; 3) they had a profound emotional attachment
to their work; and 4) they tended to conceptualize problems in terms of all encompassing images. Graham Wallas’s 1962 study of well-known scientists and other innovators yielded a widely used four-stage breakdown of the
creative process. The preparation stage consists of formulating a problem, studying previous work on it, and
thinking intensely about it. In the incubation stage, there
is no visible progress on the problem; it may be periodically “mulled over,” but it is largely left dormant, allowing subconscious ideas about it to emerge. At the illumination stage, an important insight about the problem is
reached, often in a sudden, intuitive fashion. In the final,
or verification, stage, the idea is tested and evaluated.
Creativity differs from the kinds of abilities measured
by standard intelligence tests. Creative people tend to

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

157

Creativity

from chronic illnesses or natural childbirth. In children, it
is used to overcome a wide variety of fears, such as fear
of certain animals or fear of the dark.

Creativity
Creativity, often associated with fine and performing arts, can be an important factor in human relations. (Index Stock
Imagery. Reproduced with permission.)

have average or above-average scores on IQ tests. Beyond
an IQ of 120, there is little correlation between intelligence and creativity. J.P. Guilford first distinguished the
thought processes of creative people from those of other
people in terms of convergent and divergent thinking.
Convergent thinking—the type required for traditional IQ
tests—involves the application of logic and knowledge to
narrow the number of possible solutions to a problem until
one’s thoughts “converge” on the most appropriate choice.
In contrast, divergent thinking—the kind most closely associated with creativity and originality—involves the ability to envision multiple ways to solve a problem. Guilford
identified three aspects of divergent thinking: fluency entails the ability to come up with many different solutions
to a problem in a short amount of time; flexibility is the
capacity to consider many alternatives at the same time;
and originality refers to the difference between a person’s
ideas and those of most other people.
Special tests, such as the Consequences Test, have
been designed to assess creativity. Instead of based on
one correct answer for each question, as in conventional
intelligence tests, the scoring on these tests is based on
the number of different plausible responses generated for
158

each question, or the extent to which a person’s answers
differ from those of most other test takers. Typical questions asked on such tests include “Imagine all of the
things that might possibly happen if all national and
local laws were suddenly abolished” and “Name as
many uses as you can think of for a paper clip.” While
divergent thinking is important to the creative process, it
is not the sole element necessary for creative achievement. Researchers have found little correlation between
the scores of fifth and tenth graders on divergent thinking tests and their actual achievements in high school in
such fields as art, drama, and science.
It appears that creative accomplishment requires
both divergent and convergent thinking. Originality is
not the only criterion of a successful solution to a problem: it must also be appropriate for its purpose, and convergent thinking allows one to evaluate ideas and discard
them if they are inappropriate in the light of existing information. In addition, studies of people known for their
creative accomplishments show that certain personality
traits that may be impossible to measure on a test—such
as motivation, initiative, tolerance for ambiguity, and independent judgment—are commonly associated with

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In a 1986 study, a group of researchers identified
three essential criteria for creative achievement: expertise
in a specific field, which must be learned; creative skills,
including divergent thinking; and the motivation to engage in creative activity for its own sake regardless of external reward. In this study, items created by people who
were told that their work would be judged and possibly
rewarded for creativity were found to be less creative than
the results produced by those who were simply asked to
work on a project with no prospect of external reward.
Creativity does not appear to be inherited. Studies
with identical twins raised separately show that environmental influences play at least as great a role in the development of creativity as intelligence. Creative skills of
identical twins reared apart vary more than their intellectual abilities. Studies have shown that reinforcing novel
ideas in both children and adults leads to increased creativity. The originality of block arrangements produced
by four-year-olds increased dramatically when novel designs were praised by adults; when this positive reinforcement was stopped, the children reverted to producing unimaginative patterns. Other studies have used similar techniques to boost creativity scores of fifth graders,
improve the originality of stories written by sixth
graders, and increased the ability of college students to
produce novel word associations. One interesting finding
in studies such as these is that positively reinforcing one
kind of creative activity encourages original thinking in
other areas as well. The play of children is closely related to the development of creativity. The sensory stimulation that results from exposure to new objects and activities reinforces the exploratory impulse in both children
and adults and results in an openness to new experiences
and ideas that fosters creative thinking.
Schools as well as families can encourage creativity
by offering children activities that give them an active
role in their learning, allow them freedom to explore
within a loosely structured framework and participation
in creative activities for enjoyment rather than an external reward.
See also Intelligence quotient

Creativity tests
Tests designed to measure creativity in children or
adults.

Creativity tests, mostly devised during the past 30
years, are aimed at assessing the qualities and abilities
that constitute creativity. These tests evaluate mental
abilities in ways that are different from—and even diametrically opposed to—conventional intelligence tests.
Because the kinds of abilities measured by creativity
tests differ from those measured by intelligence quotient (IQ) tests, persons with the highest scores on creativity tests do not necessarily have the highest IQs. Creative people tend to have IQs that are at least average if
not above average, but beyond a score of 120 there is little correlation between performance on intelligence and
creativity tests.
Most creativity tests in use today are based at least
partially on the theory of creativity evolved by J.P. Guilford in the 1950s. Guilford posited that the ability to envision multiple solutions to a problem lay at the core of
creativity. He called this process divergent thinking and
its opposite—the tendency to narrow all options to a single solution—convergent thinking. Guilford identified
three components of divergent thinking: fluency (the
ability to quickly find multiple solutions to a problem);
flexibility (being able to simultaneously consider a variety of alternatives); and originality (referring to ideas
that differ from those of other people). Early tests designed to assess an individual’s aptitude for divergent
thinking included the Torrance (1962) and Meeker
(1969) tests.
The most extensive work on divergent thinking was
done under Guilford’s direction at the University of
Southern California by the Aptitudes Research Project
(ARP), whose findings between the 1950s and 1970s produced a broad structure-of-intellect (SI) model which encompassed all intellectual functions, including divergent
thinking. A number of the ARP divergent thinking tests,
which were originally devised as research instruments for
the study of creativity, have been adapted by a variety of
testing companies for use by educators in placing gifted
students and evaluating gifted and talented programs. The
ARP tests are divided into verbal and figural categories.
Those that measure verbal ability include:

Further Reading

• Word fluency : writing words containing a given letter

Briggs, John. Fire in the Crucible: The Alchemy of Creative
Genius. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1988.
Dacey, John S. Understanding Creativity: The Interplay of Biological, Psychological, and Social Factors. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1998.

• Ideational fluency: naming things that belong to a
given class (i.e., fluids that will burn)
• Associational fluency: writing synonyms for a specified
word

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

159

Creativity tests

creativity. Other traits known to be shared by highly creative people include self-confidence, nonconformity, ambition, and perseverance. Albert Einstein (1879-1955)
once remarked that for every hundred thoughts he had,
one turned out to be correct.

Crisis intervention

• Expressional fluency: writing four-word sentences in
which each word begins with a specified letter
• Alternate uses: listing as many uses as possible for a
given object
• Plot titles: writing titles for short-story plots
• Consequences: listing consequences for a hypothetical
event (“What if no one needed to sleep?”)
• Possible jobs: list all jobs that might be symbolized by
a given emblem.
The figural ARP tests, which measure spatial aptitude, include the following:

ability for different populations, and excessive narrowness in terms of what they measure. In addition, it may
be impossible for any test to measure certain personal
traits that are necessary for success in creative endeavors, such as initiative, self-confidence, tolerance of ambiguity, motivation, and perseverance. Tests also tend to
create an anxiety-producing situation that may distort the
scores of some test takers.

• Making objects: drawing specified objects using only a
given set of shapes, such as a circle, square, etc.
• Sketches: elaborating on a given figure to produce
sketches of recognizable items
• Match problems: removing a specified number of
matchsticks from a diagram to produce a specified
number of geometric shapes
• Decorations: using as many different designs as possible to outline drawings of common objects.
Divergent thinking tests are generally evaluated
based on the number and variety of answers provided;
the originality of the answers; and the amount of detail
they contain (a characteristic referred to as elaboration).
A number of creativity tests currently in use include sections that measure divergent thinking.

Amabile, Teresa. The Social Psychology of Creativity. New
York: Springer-Verlag, 1983.
———. Growing Up Creative: Nurturing a Lifetime of Creativity. New York: Crown Publishers, 1989.
Guilford, J.P. The Nature of Human Intelligence. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1967.
Sternberg, R.J. The Nature of Creativity. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1988.
Torrance, E.P. Guiding Creative Talent. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1962.

Rather than ways of thinking, some creativity tests
evaluate attitudes, behavior, creative perception, or creative activity. Some creativity tests specifically address
the problem of assessing creativity in minority populations, who are at a disadvantage in tests that place a
strong emphasis on verbal and semantic ability. The Eby
Gifted Behavior Index reflects the growing view of creativity as specific to different domains. It is divided into
six talent fields: verbal, social/leadership, visual/spatial,
math/science problem-solving, mechanical/technical,
and musical. The Watson-Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal is a more analytical assessment of giftedness
based on five components of critical thinking: inference,
deduction, interpretation, awareness of assumptions, and
evaluation of arguments.
Creativity tests have been found reliable in the sense
that one person’s scores tend to remain similar across a
variety of tests. However, their validity has been questioned in terms of their ability to predict the true creative
potential of those who take them. In one study, there was
little correlation between the scores of both elementary
and secondary students on divergent thinking tests and
their actual achievements in high school in such creative
fields as art, drama, and science. Creativity tests have
also been criticized for unclear instructions, lack of suit160

Rosalie Wieder
Further Reading

Crisis intervention
Brief, preventative psychotherapy administered following a crisis.

The term crisis intervention can refer to several different therapeutic approaches, which are applied in a variety of situations. The common denominator among
these interventions, however, is their brief duration and
their focus on improving acute psychological disturbances rather than curing long-standing mental disorders. Some common examples of crisis intervention include suicide prevention telephone hotlines, hospitalbased crisis intervention, and community-based disaster
mental health.
The theoretical basis for crisis intervention programs reflects an approach that stresses the public health
and preventative components of mental health. Two psychiatrists in particular heavily influenced our approach to
crisis intervention with their crisis theory. Erich Lindemann and Gerald Caplan believed that, when people are
in a state of crisis, they are anxious, open to help, and
motivated to change. The rationale for crisis intervention
programs is therefore the belief that providing support
and guidance to people in crisis will avert prolonged
mental health problems.
Crisis or suicide hotlines offer immediate support to
individuals in acute distress. Since they are usually

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Although crisis hotlines are numerous, whether they
effectively reduce suicide has not clearly been demonstrated. Some researchers fear that the people who call
may not be those at highest risk. For many centers a
small fraction of callers appear to represent a large fraction (estimated up to 50%) of the total phone contacts.
Since the major role of the telephone operators is education about mental health resources in the community, not
therapy, these frequent callers, who are often already involved in ongoing outpatient psychiatric treatment, represent an ineffective use of resources. A further problem
is that there appears to be significant discrepancies in the
training of telephone operators at these hotlines.
Hospital-based crisis intervention usually refers to
the treatment of people suffering psychiatric emergencies that typically arise in the context of a crisis. The aim
of this type of crisis intervention is usually the normalization of some type of extreme behavior. Professionals
regard patients who are suicidal, homicidal, extremely
violent, or suffering from severe adverse drug reactions
as major psychiatric emergencies. In the United States,
when individuals appear to represent imminent danger to
themselves or others, they may be committed to a psychiatric facility against their will. In Canada, you can be
involuntarily committed and never receive treatment.
When treatment is administered, however, it is usually in
the form of psychotropic drugs with follow-up outpatient
therapy scheduled upon release.
A relatively recent type of crisis intervention involves the mobilization of mental health professionals
following plane crashes, school shootings, natural disasters, and other traumatic events affecting several people.
The professionals who arrive on the scene attempt to administer preventative procedures to avert mental disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder, which may
develop following exposure to upsetting experiences.
The most popular of these is psychological debriefing, or
CISD (critical incident stress debriefing), which originated in the military. People are encouraged to relive the
traumatic moments, with the belief that re-experiencing
the emotions will facilitate healing and prevent psychological disturbance. Unfortunately, this technique is

based on assumptions held by clinicians, rather than on
any research evidence; the efficacy of this technique has
not been demonstrated.
Some investigations of CISD suggest that we should
be more cautious about its use. Recent research in Europe indicates that this type of counseling often has no
demonstrable benefits and may even make things worse.
It is possible that having people focus on the upsetting
event emphasizes the victimization that has already
taken place, rather than people’s innate abilities to overcome these challenges. In other words, the CISD may
make people feel worse by making them question their
own coping abilities. These studies serve as reminders
that a particular psychological intervention may be intuitively appealing but at the same time counterproductive.
It is crucial that interventions be subjected to appropriate
evaluation research; otherwise our efforts to help may
actually waste resources and harm people.
Timothy Moore
Further Reading
Bressi, C., et al. “Crisis Intervention in Psychiatric Emergencies: Effectiveness and Limitations.” New Trends in Experimental and Clinical Psychiatry 15, no. 2 (1999): 163-67.
Callahan, J. “Crisis Theory and Crisis Intervention in Emergencies.” In Emergencies in Mental Health Practice:
Evaluation and Management, edited by M. Kleespies, et
al. New York: The Guilford Press, 1998.
Canterbury, R. and W. Yule. “Debriefing and Crisis Intervention.” In Post-Traumatic Stress Disorders: Concepts and
Therapy, edited by W. Yule, et al. Chinchester: John Wiley
and Sons Ltd., 1999.

Critical period
A specified time span, also referred to as the optimal or sensitive period, during which certain
events or experiences must occur in order for the
development of an organism to proceed normally.

Although this term is used in a variety of contexts,
the term is most closely associated with ethology, the
study of animal behavior in its natural environment
from the perspective of evolutionary adaptation. The
critical period plays an important role in the concept of
imprinting, first used by Konrad Lorenz in connection
with the earliest process of social attachment in young
animals. (However, the term imprinting is also applicable to any irreversible behavioral response acquired early
in life and normally released by a specific triggering
stimulus or situation.) In the most famous example of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

161

Critical period

anonymous, individuals in difficulty may find themselves less embarrassed than in face-to-face interaction.
Most hotlines are staffed by volunteers who are supervised by mental health professionals. Suicidal callers are
provided with information about how to access mental
health resources in the community. Further, some centers
will arrange referrals to clinicians. Typically, crisis hotlines do not offer therapy directly. If a volunteer feels a
caller is at immediate risk, however, confidentiality will
be broken and a mental health worker will be called
upon to intervene.

Cross-cultural psychology

imprinting, Lorenz demonstrated that exposure to an appropriately maternal object during a critical period
would activate the “following” instinct of newborn
goslings: he successfully had a group of goslings follow
him after he “impersonated” their absent mother.
Other examples of critical periods include the initial
four months of life during which puppies must be exposed to humans in order to make good pets and the
early months in which birds must be exposed to the characteristic song of their species in order to learn it. Critical periods vary in length: the period for identifying
one’s mother may last only a few hours, while the period
for learning to identify a mate may take several months.
The specifically human phenomenon of language
development also appears to be subject to a critical period. So-called “wild” or “feral” children deprived of
human society for an extended period show that they
have been unable to catch up on language due to lack of
exposure early in life.
The term “critical period” is also used to describe
physiological as well as behavioral phenomena. For example, the embryonic stage in humans is a critical period
for certain types of growth (such as the appearance of the
heart, eyes, ears, hands, and feet) which must occur for
prenatal development to proceed normally.
Further Reading
Denny, M. Ray. Comparative Psychology: Research in Animal
Behavior. New York:Dorset Press, 1970.
Lorenz, Konrad. The Foundation of Ethology. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1981.

Cross-cultural psychology
A subfield of psychology concerned with observing
human behavior in contrasting cultures.

Studies in this discipline attempt to expand the compass of psychological research beyond the few highly industrialized nations on which it has traditionally focused.
While definitions of what constitutes a culture vary widely, most experts concur that “culture” involves patterns of
behavior, symbols, and values. The prominent anthropologist Clifford Geertz has described culture as “. . . a historically transmitted pattern of meanings embodied in
symbols, a system of inherited conceptions expressed in
symbolic forms by means of which men communicate,
perpetuate, and develop their knowledge about and attitudes toward life.”
While cross-cultural psychology and anthropology
often overlap, both disciplines tend to focus on different
162

aspects of a culture. For example, many issues of interest
to psychologists are not addressed by anthropologists,
who have their own concerns traditionally, including such
topics as kinship, land distribution, and ritual. When anthropologists do concentrate on areas of psychology, they
focus on activities whereby data can be collected through
direct observation, such as the age of children at weaning
or child rearing practices. However, there is no significant
body of anthropological data on many of the more abstract questions commonly addressed by psychologists,
such as cultural conceptions of intelligence.
Cross-cultural research can yield important information on many topics of interest to psychologists. In one of
the best known studies, researchers found evidence that
human perceptual processes develop differently depending on what types of shapes and angles people are exposed to daily in their environment. People living in
countries such as the United States with many buildings
containing 90-degree angles are susceptible to different
optical illusions than those in rural African villages,
where such buildings are not the norm. Cross-cultural
studies have also discovered that the symptoms of most
psychological disorders vary from one culture to another,
and has led to a reconsideration of what constitutes normal human sexuality. For example, homosexuality, long
considered pathological behavior in the United States, is
approved of in other cultures and is even encouraged in
some as a normal sexual outlet before marriage.
Collection of cross-cultural data can also shed new
light on standard psychological theories. In the 1920s, the
anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski observed that
young boys living in the Trobriand islands exhibited the
type of hostility that Sigmund Freud had described in his
formulation of the Oedipus complex, only it was directed
not at their fathers but at a maternal uncle who was assigned the role of family disciplinarian. This observation
posed a challenge to Freud’s oedipal theory by raising the
possibility that boys’ tense relations with their fathers at a
certain period in their lives may be a reaction to discipline
rather than a manifestation of sexual jealousy. The questions raised by Malinowski’s observation demonstrate a
particularly valuable type of contribution that cross-cultural research can make to psychology. Psychological research often confounds, or merges, two variables in a situation in this case, the boy’s anger toward his father and
the father’s sexual role in relation to the mother. A crosscultural perspective can untangle such confounded variables when it finds them occurring separately in other cultures—e.g., the disciplinarian (the uncle), and the mother’s lover (the father), as two separate persons.
Cross-cultural psychology may also be practiced
within a given society by studying the contrasts between
its dominant culture and subcultures. A subculture—de-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Barnouw, Victor. Culture and Personality. 4th ed. Homewood,
IL: Dorsey Press, 1985.
Bock, Philip K. Rethinking Psychological Anthropology: Continuity and Change in the Study of Human Action. New
York: W.H. Freeman, 1988.

Cross-sectional study
Research that collects data simultaneously from
people of different ages, in contrast to a longitudinal study, which follows one group of subjects over
a period of time.

A cross-sectional study is a research method where
data are collected at the same time from people in different age categories. It contrasts with the method, known
as longitudinal study, where the same group of subjects
is studied over time. One weakness, or confounding variable, of the cross-sectional study is that its subjects, in
addition to being different ages, are also born in different
years, and their behavior may thus be influenced by differences in education, cultural influences, and medical
treatment. In the longitudinal study, data can be obtained
from subjects of different ages born within the same period of time. However, a confounding variable in longitudinal studies is the degree to which each person’s environmental influences will vary from those of others over
the period of time covered by the experiment.

Cults
Highly organized groups led by a dynamic leader
who exercises strong control.

A cult is a structured group, most of whose members demonstrate unquestioned loyalty to a dynamic

leader. The cult leader governs most, if not all, aspects of
the lives of his or her followers, often insisting that they
break all ties with the world outside of the cult. Such
groups are usually thought of in terms of religion, although other types of cults can and do exist.
The proliferation of religious cults in the United
States is considered by many experts as symptomatic of
the general social discordance that has plagued postwar
Western society. Cults offer the allure of an ordered
world that is easily understood. Clear rules of behavior
are enforced and nagging questions about meaning and
purpose are dispelled by the leader, who defines members’ lives in service to the cult’s interest. It is probably
most useful to examine the phenomenon of cults without
dwelling on the sensationalistic practices of the flamboyant, the infamous, and the suicidal. When a psychologist
examines a cult and its dynamics, what is actually observed is the mental condition of the member; in other
words, what is it about the individual that allows them to
willingly relinquish themselves to such rigid and dogmatic ways of thinking and living?
To understand this process, consider that many social organizations other than what we traditionally think
of as cults require strict adherence to a set of beliefs and,
in turn, provide a sense of meaning and purpose to their
followers. Behavior that is not normally considered as
being cult-like can be seen as having some of the main
characteristics of cults. The rigid social contract of the
military, for instance, is considered by many psychologists as being cult-like. Other social organizations that
have had a profound impact on the lives of its followers
include self-help groups, such as Alcoholics Anonymous, where selflessness and devotion to the group are
highly valued and rewarded. Certain types of political
groups and terrorist organizations are still other examples of “cults” that defy the common definition of the
term. Dr. Arthur Deikman, clinical professor of psychiatry at the University of California at San Francisco, is
one of many psychologists who has observed cultic behavior in many areas of society other than in extremist
religious groups. In the introduction to his 1990 book,
The Wrong Way Home: Uncovering the Patterns of Cult
Behavior in American Society, Deikman asserted that
“behavior similar to that which takes place in extreme
cults takes place in all of us,” and suggested that “the
longing for parents persists into adulthood and results in
cult behavior that pervades normal society.”
Because cultic behavior underlies more than extremist religious sects, many psychologists refer to these
groups as charismatic groups. Marc Galanter, professor
of psychiatry at New York University, defines the characteristics of charismatic groups in his study Cults: Faith,
Healing, and Coercion (1989). According to Galanter,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

163

Cults

fined as a group of people whose experiences differ from
those of the majority culture—may be constituted in different ways. Often, it is an ethnic, racial, or religious
group. Any group that develops its own customs, norms,
and jargon may be considered a subculture, however, including such deviant groups as drug or gang subcultures.
A prominent area of intersection between psychological
inquiry and subcultures within the United States has been
the issue of cultural bias in testing. Today, testing experts
assert that there is no evidence for bias across race or social class in “standardized” intelligence and achievement
tests. However, children whose primary language is not
English should be tested in their primary language.

Cults

charismatic group members “1) have a shared belief system; 2) sustain a high level of social cohesiveness; 3) are
strongly influenced by the group’s behavioral norms, and
4) impute charismatic (or sometimes divine) power to
the group or its leadership.” Other psychologists have
devised additional theories to explain the drawing power
of charismatic groups, and some conclude that people
who devote themselves to such groups have not yet
achieved the developmental stage of individuation. Still
other experts, drawing on the field of sociobiology, suggest that the need to be part of a group has biological,
evolutionary roots traceable to that period in human history when to be banned from the dominant hunter-gatherer group meant almost certain death.
Whatever the origins of the psychological need to be
a part of a defined group, the fact is most people do not
fall under the sway of charismatic groups. Typically,
such groups find recruits among young people. Usually,
such a young person is approached by friendly, outgoing
recruiters for the cult who express a deep interest in the
person’s life and offer empathy and understanding for
the difficulties they may be experiencing. These difficulties may be in relation to a failed romance, an unhappy
family life, or an existential crisis of the sort usually associated with late adolescence in which a young person
has no idea how they fit in the world. The recruiters are
often trained to provide a “friendly ear” to troubled
young people, to validate their experiences as being
common, and, finally, to suggest that other people (such
as themselves) have found solace in their groups.
During the process of initiation, recruits may experience severe psychological disorders as they at once
begin and resist immersion into an entirely new system.
Abandoning old allegiances and belief systems can bring
about intense guilt before the recruit completely immerses him or herself into the charismatic group. Some
psychologists believe that such mental illnesses as dissociative identity disorders, pathologic adjustment reactions, major depressive disorders, and others may be attributed to the agonizing process of joining a charismatic
group. Once immersed in the cult, members will often
cut all ties with their past lives, ending contact with their
families and friends as they join a new social order that
seems to give them meaning and purpose. This kind of
behavior is obviously less true of charismatic groups
such as the military and some types of self-help groups,
but these symptoms can nonetheless appear in less extreme forms.
Interviews with former cult members have revealed
that in extremist religious cults, there are often tremendous obstacles to leaving. These obstacles can come in
the form of peer pressure, where loyal cult members
will intervene in the case of a member who has doubts
164

about the cult and longs for his or her old life, or the obstacles may be physical ones for those whose cult lives
communally in an isolated area. Often, family members
of persons in religious cults hire what are called “deprogrammers” to kidnap their loved ones and take them to
some neutral place where they can be reasoned with sensibly without the interference of other cult members espousing the group’s prevailing ideology.
Most psychologists would probably acknowledge
that there exists a deep human need to belong to a group.
Often, this need leads people to form what might be
viewed as unhealthy allegiances to a person or group
who, ultimately, does not truly have the person’s interest
at heart.
Followers of American-born cult leader Jim Jones
left the U.S. to set up the Jonestown commune in the
Guyana jungle in South America. After a U.S. Congressman and three journalists investigating the cult were
killed, Jones persuaded 911 members of his People’s
Temple flock to kill themselves with cyanide-laced potions in a mass suicide on Nov. 18, 1978. David Koresh,
leader of the Branch Davidians, a group that originally
split from the Seventh Day Adventist Church during the
Depression, led 82 people to their death, when he refused to be served with a search and arrest warrant at the
Davidian compound in Waco, Texas. Koresh’s followers
believed he was the Messiah, despite reports of child
abuse and other questionable behaviors. After an initial
gunfight that killed four agents and six Davidians, a 51day stand-off occurred between federal agents and the
Davidians holed up in the compound. When agents
launched a tear gas attack on April 19, 1993, to end the
siege, a fire burned the compound and killed 82 Davidians, probably in a deliberate mass suicide.
Bodies of 39 similarly dressed men and women
were found in San Diego on March 26, 1997, after a
mass suicide led by Marshall Applewhite, cult leader of
Heaven’s Gate. The deaths were triggered by the cult’s
belief that a flying saucer traveled behind comet HaleBopp to take them home, an evolutionary existence
above the human level. Articles have appeared about the
use of the Internet to recruit Heaven’s Gate followers.
Further Reading
Ankerberg, John and Weldon, John. Encyclopedia of Cults and
New Religions Eugene, Ore.: Harvest House Publishers,
1999.
Deikman, Arthur J. The Wrong Way Home: Uncovering Patterns of Cult Behavior in American Society. Boston: Beacon Press, 1990.
Deutsch, A. “Tenacity of Attachment to a Cult Leader: A Psychiatric Perspective.” American Journal of Psychiatry 137
(1980): 1569-73.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Military psychology

Culture-fair test
An intelligence test in which performance is not
based on experience with or knowledge of a specific culture.

Culture-fair tests, also called culture-free tests, are
designed to assess intelligence (or other attributes) without relying on knowledge specific to any individual cultural group. The first culture-fair test, called Army Examination Beta, was developed by the United States military during World War II to screen soldiers of average
intelligence who were illiterate or for whom English was
a second language. Beginning in the postwar period, culture-fair tests, which rely largely on nonverbal questions,
have been used in public schools with Hispanic students
and other non-native-English speakers whose lack of familiarity with both English language and American culture have made it impossible to assess their intelligence
level using standard IQ tests. Culture-fair tests currently
administered include the Learning Potential Assessment
Device (DPAD), the Culture-Free Self-Esteem Inventories, and the Cattell Culture Fair Series consisting of
scales one to three for ages four and up. The Cattell
scales are intended to assess intelligence independent of
cultural experience, verbal ability, or educational level.
They are used for special education placement and college and vocational counseling. The tests consist mostly
of paper-and-pencil questions involving the relationships
between figures and shapes. Parts of scale one, used with
the youngest age group, utilize various objects instead of
paper and pencil. Activities in scales two and three, for
children age eight and up, include completing series,
classifying, and filling in incomplete designs.
Culture-fair testing is a timely issue given current
debate over bias in intelligence and educational testing
as it affects students who can speak and write English,
but who are unfamiliar with white middle-class culture.
Bias in intelligence testing has a historical precedent in

early tests designed to exclude immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe from admission to the United
States on grounds of mental inferiority. Critics of current
tests claim that they discriminate against ethnic minorities in similar ways by calling for various types of
knowledge unavailable to those outside the middle-class
cultural mainstream. To dramatize the discriminatory nature of most intelligence testing, Professor Robert L.
Williams devised the Black Intelligence Test of Cultural
Homogeneity that requires a command of vocabulary
items widely known among African Americans but not
familiar to most whites (such as “do rag” and “four corners”) and a knowledge of black history and culture
(“Who wrote the Negro National Anthem?”). Williams
claimed that the difficulties faced by white persons attempting to take this test are comparable to those that
confront many blacks taking standardized IQ tests.
Critics of standardized tests claim that minority test
takers are also penalized in ways other than their unfamiliarity with specific facts. A pervasive negative attitude toward such tests may give children from minority
groups less motivation than whites to perform well on
them, further reduced by low levels of trust in and identification with the person administering the test. In addition, students from a minority culture may be more likely to interpret and answer a question in ways that differ
from the prescribed answer. (In the field of educational
psychology, this phenomenon is referred to as divergent
thinking and also tends to penalize gifted children.)
Studies have shown that culture-fair tests do reduce differences in performance between whites and members of
minority groups. However, they lag behind the standard
tests in predicting success in school, suggesting that in
their quest for academic success, members of minority
groups must overcome cultural barriers that extend beyond those encountered in IQ tests.
Further Reading
Fraser, Steven. The Bell Curve Wars: Race, Intelligence, and
the Future of America. New York: Basic Books, 1995.
Herrnstein, Richard J., and Charles Murray. The Bell Curve:
Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life. New
York: Free Press, 1994.
Mensh, Elaine, and Harry Mensh. The IQ Mythology: Class,
Race, Gender, and Inequality. Carbondale, IL: Southern
Illinois University Press, 1991.
Seligman, Daniel. A Question of Intelligence: The IQ Debate
in America. New York: Birch Lane Press, 1992.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

165

Culture-fair test

Dolan, Sean. Everything you need to know about cults. New
York: Rosen Pub. Group, 2000.
Hall, J.R. “The Apocalypse at Jonestown.” In Gods We Trust:
New Patterns of Religious Pluralism in America, edited
by T. Robbins and D. Anthony. New Brunswick, NJ:
Transaction Books, 1981.

D
Charles Robert Darwin
1809-1882
British naturalist whose theory of organic evolution
through natural selection revolutionized science.

Charles Robert Darwin was born in Shrewsbury, England. His father was a successful provincial physician, and
his grandfather, Erasmus Darwin (1731-1802), had been a
distinguished intellectual figure. Young Darwin attended
the Shrewsbury School, and his early failure to achieve
academic distinction continued at Edinburgh University,
where he studied medicine, and at Cambridge University,
where he studied theology. While at Cambridge, however,
Darwin enthusiastically pursued natural history as an avocation, drawing the attention of botanist John Stevens
Henslow (1796-1861) and geologist Adam Sedgwick
(1785-1873). In 1831, through his connection with
Henslow, Darwin joined the expedition team aboard the
survey ship H.M.S. Beagle headed for the coasts of South
America, the Galápagos Islands, New Zealand, and Tasmania. There is some indication that Darwin went on the
voyage in order to accompany Captain FitzRoy. FitzRoy,
as captain, was not to socialize with the lower status crew
members on the ship, and he was worried about maintaining his mental health during the long, solitary voyage.
(FitzRoy later committed suicide.) During what turned out
to be a five-year voyage, Darwin, a creationist, recorded
his observations. Upon his return to England, Darwin developed his theory of evolution, one of the major intellectual achievements of the nineteenth century. However, because of his creationist perspective, some of the observations made during the voyage were not useful in the development of his evolutionary ideas. In 1858, when another
scientist, Alfred Russell Wallace (1823-1913) shared his
observations gathered in the Malay Archipelago, Darwin
hastened to publish The Origin of Species to ensure his
own work would receive recognition.
Darwin’s theory of evolution postulates that all
species on earth change over time, and that process is
166

Charles Darwin (The Library of Congress. Reproduced by
permission.)

governed by the principles of natural selection. These
principles hold that in the struggle for existence, some
individuals, because of advantageous biological adaptation, are better able to occupy effectively a given ecological niche and therefore will produce more offspring
than individuals who are less able. Realizing that his
theory challenged biblically oriented views about the
nature and origins of humans and animals, Darwin was
extremely cautious and continued his research for another 18 years before publishing it in 1859 as On the
Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection; or, the
Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life.
Every copy of the book was sold on the first day of pub-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Although psychology was one of the fields for
which Darwin’s theory had revolutionary implications,
it was largely left to others—notably Darwin’s cousin
Francis Galton—to expand them publicly. However,
toward the end of his career, Darwin published three
books in which he explored how human mental qualities could be understood as the result of evolution. In
The Descent of Man (1871), he supported the controversial position that human beings are descended from
animal ancestors. In line with this idea, he argued that
the mental activities of humans and animals are fundamentally similar. He identified the presence in animals
of “human” qualities such as courage and devotion, and
“human” emotions, including pride, jealousy, and
shame. After examining these and other common mental functions, such as memory, attention, and dreaming, Darwin concluded that the mental difference between humans and the higher animals is one of degree
rather than kind.

and James Angell (1869-1949) in the United States,
who together founded the functionalist movement at
the University of Chicago. Darwin’s conception of the
continuity between humans and other species gave the
study of animal behavior a new importance. Sigmund
Freud’s younger colleague, George J. Romanes (18481894), to whom Darwin turned over his notes on animal behavior shortly before his death, established the
field of comparative psychology. Paralleling the science of comparative anatomy, this field seeks to provide insights about human beings by studying the similarities and differences between human and animal
psychological functioning. In addition, Darwin’s principle of natural selection led to a greater interest in
variation and individual differences among members
of the same species.
Darwin’s other books include The Variations of Animals and Plants under Domestication (1868), Insectivorous Plants (1875), and The Power of Movement in
Plants (1880). He was awarded membership in the London Geological Society in 1836 and won election to the
Royal Society in 1839.
Further Reading

In The Expression of the Emotionsin Man and Animals (1872), Darwin posited that human emotional expressions have evolved over time because of their link
with reactions that have had adaptive or survival value.
For example, an animal baring its teeth in rage is literally
preparing to fight; thus its emotion gives it a physical
advantage. Similarly, Darwin postulated that the “fight
or flight” reaction, a heightened state of nervous arousal,
was a mechanism that aided survival. He also put forth
that human reactions which no longer have any clear survival value probably did in the past and that the similarity of emotional expression among all known human
groups suggests a common descent from an earlier prehuman ancestor.

Clark, Ronald W. The Survival of Charles Darwin: A Biography of a Man and an Idea. New York: Random House,
1984.
Darwin, Charles. The Autobiography of Charles Darwin, 18091882. Edited by Nora Barlow. New York: Norton, 1969.
De Beer, Gavin. Charles Darwin: Evolution by Natural Selection. London: Doubleday, 1963.
Gruber, Howard E. Darwin on Man: A Psychological Study of
Scientific Creativity. London: Wildwood House, 1974.
Ridley, Mark. The Darwin Reader. New York: Norton, 1987.

Darwin’s final contribution to psychology was the
publication in 1877 of Biographical Sketch of an Infant,
based on a detailed log he had kept on the development
of his eldest child, who was born in 1840. This milestone
in the history of child psychology was probably the first
publication of its type. One seminal idea expressed in
this short work is that the individual’s development parallels the development of the species to which it belongs.
(Darwin had earlier made a similar observation about the
development of the fetus before birth.)

A temporary escape from daily reality by forming
mental pictures, usually in spontaneous, brief
episodes, of other experiences.

Darwin’s work had far-reaching influences on the
theory and practice of psychology. Its emphasis on the
individual’s adaptation to the environment helped establish the “functional” view of the mind and of human
behavior, influencing such thinkers as John Dewey

Daydreaming

Daydreams are a form of imagination. In daydreams, the person forms a mental image of a past experience or of a situation that he or she has never actually
experienced. Some psychologists use the acronym TUIT
(Task-Unrelated Images and Thoughts) to describe
episodes of daydreaming. A daydream may be triggered
by a situation, a memory, or a sensory input (sight,
taste, smell, sound, touch).
The daydreamer may use these mental pictures to
escape from reality temporarily, to overcome a frustrating situation, or to satisfy hidden wishes. Almost all peo-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

167

Daydreaming

lication. Within a few years, scientists were convinced
of the soundness of the theory, although popular debate
about its ideological and theological implications has
continued to the present.

Deductive reasoning

ple daydream, although the frequency of daydreaming
varies considerably from individual to individual. Psychologists estimate that one-third to one-half of a person’s thoughts while awake are daydreams, although a
single daydream rarely last more than a few minutes.
When the daydreamer begins to confuse the mental
images with reality, the daydream is called an hallucination. Daydreaming is generally not harmful, unless the
daydreaming episodes interfere with activities of daily
living. When the daydreamer’s daily routine is disrupted—a driver misses an exit on the freeway continuously,
or a student does not hear the teacher assigning homework—he or she may want to consider whether the daydreams are a symptom of a psychological problem.
Although most psychologists view daydreams as
generally healthy and natural, this was not always the
case. In the 1960s, for example, textbooks used for training teachers provided strategies for combating daydreaming, using language similar to that used in describing
drug use. Sigmund Freud felt that only unfulfilled individuals created fantasies, and that daydreaming and fantasy were early signs of mental illness. By the late
1980s, most psychologists considered daydreams a natural component of the mental process for most individuals.

ing and completing the task with the desired successful
outcome.
Further Reading
Hogan, John. “Daydreaming: Experiments Reveal Links Between Memory and Sleep.” Scientific American (October
1994): 32+.
Seligson, Susan V. “What Your Daydreams Really Mean.” Redbook (July 1995): 51+.

Deductive reasoning
Way of thinking that relates ideas to one another in
reaching conclusions.

Deductive reasoning is a way of reasoning that relates two or more general concepts or conditions to a
specific case. For example, a child learns that birds fly
south in October, and that a robin is a bird, he will use
deductive reasoning to conclude that a robin will fly
south in October. Deductive reasoning is often confused
with inductive reasoning, which uses a specific observation to reach a general conclusion.

Similar to dreams experienced during sleep, daydreams occur in cycles set by biological cycles of temperature and hormone levels (psychologists estimate that
the average person daydreams about every 90 minutes),
and peak around the lunch hour (noon to 2 p.m.). Daydreaming first occurs for most people during childhood,
sometime before age three, and these early daydreams
set the pattern for adult daydreaming. Children who have
positive, happy daydreams of success and achievement
generally continue these types of mental images into
adulthood; these daydreamers are most likely to benefit
from the positive aspects of mental imagery. Daydreams become the impetus for problem-solving, creativity, or accomplishment. On the other hand, children
whose daydreams are negative, scary, or visualize disasters are likely to experience anxiety, and this pattern will
carry over into adulthood as well. A child’s daydreams
may take a visible or public form—the daydreamer talks
about his mental images while he is experiencing them,
and may even act out the scenario she or he is imagining.
After age ten, however, the process of internalizing daydreaming begins.

The concept of the defense mechanism originated
with Sigmund Freud (1856-1939) and was later elaborated by other psychodynamically oriented theorists, notably his daughter Anna Freud (1895-1982). Defense
mechanisms allow negative feelings to be lessened without an alteration of the situation that is producing them,
often by distorting the reality of that situation in some
way. While they can help in coping with stress, they pose
a danger because the reduction of stress can be so appealing that the defenses are maintained and become habitual.
They can also be harmful if they become a person’s primary mode of responding to problems. In children, excessive dependence on defense mechanisms may produce
social isolation and distortion of reality and hamper the
ability to engage in and learn from new experiences.

It is not unusual for a daydream, or series of daydreams, to precede an episode of creative writing or invention. Athletes, musicians, and other performers use a
form of daydreaming known as visualization. As the individual prepares for a competition or performance, he
or she forms a mental picture of him- or herself execut-

Defense mechanisms include denial, repression,
suppression, projection, displacement, reaction formation, regression, fixation, identification, introjection, rationalization, isolation, sublimation, compensation, and
humor. Denial and repression both distort reality by
keeping things hidden from consciousness. In the case

168

Defense mechanisms
Unconscious strategies for avoiding or reducing
threatening feelings, such as fear and anxiety.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In repression, painful feelings are conscious initially
and then forgotten. However, they are stored in the unconscious, from which, under certain circumstances,
they can be retrieved (a phenomenon Freud called “the
return of the repressed”). Repression can range from momentary memory lapses to forgetting the details of a catastrophic event, such as a murder or an earthquake.
Complete amnesia can even occur in cases where a person has experienced something very painful. The Oedipus complex by which Sigmund Freud explained the acquisition of gender identity relies on a child’s repression of incestuous desires toward the parent of the opposite sex and feelings of rivalry toward the parent of the
same sex. Other situations may also occasion the repression of hostile feelings toward a loved one (especially a
parent). Possibly the most extreme is child abuse, the
memory of which may remain repressed long into adulthood, sometimes being deliberately retrieved in therapy
through hypnosis and other techniques.
A third defense mechanism, related to denial and repression, is suppression, by which unpleasant feelings
are suppressed through a conscious decision not to think
about them. Suppression differs from repression and denial in that the undesirable feelings are available but deliberately ignored (unlike repression and denial, where
the person is completely unaware of these feelings). Suppression generally works by replacing unpleasant
thoughts with others that do not produce stress. This may
be done instinctively, or it may be done deliberately in a
therapeutic context. Cognitive behavior therapy in particular makes use of this technique to help people combat negative thought patterns that produce maladaptive
emotions and behavior. For example, a child may be in-

structed to block feelings of fear by thinking about a
pleasant experience, such as a party, an academic
achievement, or a victory in a sporting event. Suppression is considered one of the more mature and healthy
defense mechanisms.
Projection and displacement allow a person to acknowledge anxiety-producing feelings but transfer them
to either another source or another object. In projection,
the undesirable feelings are attributed to another person
or persons. An angry person believes others are angry at
her; a person who is critical of others believes they are
critical of him. Very young children are especially prone
to projection because of their egocentric orientation,
which blurs the boundary between themselves and others, making it easier to also blur the distinction between
their feelings and those of others.
Displacement is a defense by which an impulse perceived as dangerous is displaced, either through redirection toward a different object or replacement by another
impulse. In the first type, known as object displacement,
anger or another emotion is initially felt toward a person against whom it is unsafe to express it (in children,
for example, toward a parent). Displacement functions as
a means by which the impulse can still be expressed—allowing a catharsis of the original emotion—but toward
a safer target, such as a sibling, peer, or even a toy. In the
second type of displacement, known as drive displacement, the object of the emotion remains the same but the
emotion itself is replaced by a less threatening one.
Reaction formation, another defense mechanism, involves behavior that is diametrically opposed to the impulses or feelings that one is repressing. For example, a
parent who is repressing feelings of resentment or rejection toward a child may overcompensate by appearing to
be lavishly generous and solicitous of the child’s welfare. In this type of situation, the child generally senses
the true hostility underlying the parent’s behavior. A
child who is being toilet trained may show an exaggerated sense of fastidiousness to counter conflicts over controlling elimination. The Freudian stage of sexual latency in middle childhood is yet another example of reaction formation: in order to repress their sexual feelings,
children at this age evince a strong sense of indifference
or even hostility toward the opposite sex. Sometimes a
distinction is drawn between feelings that are diametrically opposed to a repressed impulse and the actual behavior that expresses them, with the former called reaction formation and the latter referred to as undoing.
Two defense mechanisms—regression and fixation
—are associated with developmental disturbances in
children. In regression, a child, confronted with a situation that produces conflict, anxiety, or frustration, reverts

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

169

Defense mechanisms

of denial, an unpleasant reality is ignored, and a realistic
interpretation of potentially threatening events is replaced by a benign but inaccurate one. Either feelings or
events (or both) may be denied. In very young children,
a degree of denial is normal. One way of coping with
the relative powerlessness of childhood is for young
children to sometimes act as if they can change reality by
refusing to acknowledge it, thereby ascribing magical
powers to their thoughts and wishes. For example, a
child who is told that her parents are divorcing may deny
that it is happening or deny that she is upset about it. Denial has been shown to be effective in reducing the
arousal caused by a threatening situation. In life-threatening or other extreme situations, denial can temporarily
be useful in helping people cope, but in the long term
painful feelings and events must be acknowledged in
order to avoid further psychological and emotional problems. Related to denial is avoidance, which involves
avoiding situations that are expected to elicit unwanted
emotions and impulses.

Delayed response

to the behavior of an earlier stage of development, such
as thumb-sucking or bed-wetting, in an attempt to regain
the lost sense of safety that characterized the earlier period. In fixation, the child doesn’t lose any previously
gained developmental ground but refuses to move ahead
because developmental progress has come to be associated with anxiety in some way.
Identification, which is basic to human development
and an essential part of the learning process, can also
serve as a defense mechanism. Taking on the characteristics of someone else can enable a person to engage in
impulses or behavior that she sees as forbidden to her but
acceptable for the person with whom she is identifying.
Another motive for identification is a fear of losing the
person with whom one identifies. One particularly wellknown variety of identification is identification with the
aggressor, where someone who is victimized in some
way takes on the traits of the victimizer to combat feelings of powerlessness. This type of projection occurs
when a child who is abused by his parents abuses others
in turn. In some cases, however, this type of projection
may occur in response to aggression that is imagined
rather than real and create a self-perpetuating cycle by
actually eliciting in others the aggression that was only
imaginary initially. In introjection, which is related to
identification, only a particular aspect of someone else’s
personality is internalized.
Rationalization, another type of defense mechanism, is an attempt to deny one’s true motives (to oneself
or others) by using a reason (or rationale) that is more
logical or socially acceptable than one’s own impulses.
Typical rationalizations include such statements as “I
don’t care if I wasn’t chosen for the team; I didn’t really
want to play soccer anyway” and “I couldn’t get my
homework done because I had too many other things to
do.” Adolescents, caught between their own unruly impulses and adult expectations that seem unreasonable,
are especially prone to rationalizing their behavior. Their
advanced cognitive development makes many adolescents adept at this strategy.
Like rationalization, isolation is a rather complicated defense. It involves compartmentalizing one’s experience so that an event becomes separated from the feelings that accompanied it, allowing it to be consciously
available without the threat of painful feelings. Isolation
can take on aspects of a dissociative disorder, with children separating parts of their lives to the point that they
think of themselves as more than one person (for example, a good child and a bad one who only appears under
certain circumstances). By compartmentalizing they can
be relieved of feeling responsible for the actions of the
“bad child.”
170

Sublimation, one of the healthiest defense mechanisms, involves rechanneling the energy connected with
an unacceptable impulse into one that is more socially acceptable. In this way, inappropriate sexual or aggressive
impulses can be released in sports, creative pursuits, or
other activities. Undesired feelings can also be sublimated into altruistic impulses, from which one may derive
the vicarious pleasure of helping others. Other defense
mechanisms generally viewed in a positive light include
compensation —devoting unusual efforts to achievement
in order to overcome feelings of inferiority—and the use
of humor as a coping device.
Further Reading
Firestone, Robert W., and Joyce Catlett. Psychological Defenses in Everyday Life. New York: Human Sciences Press,
1989.
Freud, Anna. The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defense. New
York: International Universities Press, 1966.
Freud, Sigmund. An Outline of Psychoanalysis. New York:
Norton, 1987.
Goleman, Daniel. Vital Lies, Simple Truths: The Psychology of
Self-Deception. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1985.

Delayed response
A characteristic event of an experimental procedure in which the subject is not permitted to respond to a stimulus until some time after the stimulus has been removed.

A delayed response experiment might include placing a stimulus object inside one of several similar
opaque containers while the subject is watching but is
restrained, and then allowing the subject to search for
the object after a certain period of delay. Delayed response experiments have been conducted in the psychological study of both animals and (usually very young)
humans. Some psychologists believe that the ability to
respond appropriately after a significant delay indicates
the operation of some form of advanced mental functioning, and that investigations of delayed response are
useful in the comparative psychological analysis of various species.

Delayed speech
See Language delay

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The ability to forgo an immediate pleasure or reward in order to gain a more substantial one later.

Almost everyone, everyday, practices delay of gratification—whether deciding to skip dessert in order to
lose weight or give up smoking in order to live longer.
The ability to delay gratification is often a sign of emotional and social maturity. Young children, for example,
find it more difficult to delay gratification than older
children. When kindergartners in one study were offered
a choice between getting a small candy bar immediately
or a larger one later, 72% chose the smaller candy bar.
This number decreased to 67% among first and second
graders and 49% for third and fourth graders. By the
fifth and sixth grades it had fallen to 38%, nearly half the
rate for kindergartners.
Although most people show an improved ability to
delay gratification as they get older, some are more successful at it than others. Generally, the people who are
most successful in delaying gratification are those with
an internal locus of control (a strong belief that their actions can influence events). By contrast, people with an
external locus of control are less likely to forego present
pleasures for greater future gain.

Delirium
A mental condition characterized by disorientation, confusion, uncontrolled imagination, reduced
ability to focus or to maintain attention, and general inability to correctly comprehend immediate reality; often accompanied by illusions, delusions,
and hallucinations.

Delirious behavior ranges from mildly inappropriate
to maniacal, and is a symptom of a number of disorders.
Delirium has been classified into several varieties, based
primarily on causal factors. As an example, alcoholwithdrawal delirium, which is also called delirium
tremens or D.T.s (because of the characteristic tremor),
is an acute delirium related to physical deterioration and
the abrupt lowering of blood alcohol levels upon cessation of alcohol intake after a period of abuse.
Delirium is believed to be caused by a chemical imbalance in the brain, which, in turn, may be caused by
fever, drugs, head injury, disease, malnutrition, or other
factors. The onset of delirium is usually fairly rapid, although the condition sometimes develops slowly, especially if a metabolic disorder is involved. Typically, deliri-

Delusion/Delusional
disorders
Beliefs that are in stark contrast to reality, often
having to do with persecution or an exaggerated
sense of importance or glory.

Delusions are generally experienced by people suffering from a severe psychotic disorder, usually schizophrenia, although delusional thinking can occur in other
types of patients (as the result of drug or alcohol abuse,
for instance). Typical delusional ideas are categorized
into delusions of grandeur, in which a person imagines
for him or herself some God-given purpose or, in some
cases, believe they are in fact historical personalities of
great importance. Another type of delusion are delusions
of persecution, in which a patient will believe that some
person or group is out to harm him. Still another set of
delusions involve what are referred to as “command hallucinations,” in which a person hears voices telling him
or her to commit an act. These delusional thoughts can
lead people to acts of self-mutilation or to violent criminal acts.
Many psychological disorders feature aspects of delusional thought. People suffering from depression often
experience delusions such as beliefs that they are worthless, sinful, or too unlikable to engage productively in society. Other forms of delusional thinking occur in people
with somatoform and dissociative identity disorders.
These include body dysmorphic disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and multiple personality disorder.
John Junginger, a clinical scientist at Indiana University, studied 138 patients who exhibited delusional
beliefs and developed a scale of “bizarreness.” Junginger
identified the 12 types of delusional beliefs (including
those mentioned above) as well as several others, such as
“insertion” and “control.” After categorizing delusional
thoughts as such, Junginger conducted another study, attempting to discern how well his categories could predict
violent behavior. Describing the study in Omni magazine, Steve Nadis wrote that “Junginger suspects psychotics are more likely to act out their false beliefs if
they have involved, highly ‘systematized’ delusions.”
That is, elaborate delusional beliefs correlate more highly with violent behavior than vague delusional beliefs; so
that someone who believes that some unidentified person
is out to hurt them is less likely to act violently than

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

171

Delusion/Delusional disorders

Delay of gratification

um disappears soon after the underlying cause is successfully treated. Occasionally, however, recovery from delirium is limited by neurological or other damage.

Dementia

someone who believes that a specific neighbor has been
sending him messages to kill himself through the walls.
While researchers such as Junginger have sought
out methods to predict violence as a result of delusions,
other psychologists have been attempting to explain the
occurrence of delusional thoughts. One intriguing idea,
proposed by G.A. Roberts in the British Journal of Psychiatry in 1991, is that delusions actually help psychotic
and schizophrenic patients by providing them with a detailed sense of purpose for their lives. Roberts found that
people currently exhibiting delusional behavior were less
depressed than those who had been delusional but were
recovering.
Further Reading
Nadis, Steve. “Dangerous Delusions: Making Sense of Senseless Behavior.” Omni (December 1994): 32.
Starr, Cynthia. “A ‘Secret Disorder’Yields to Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors.” Drug Topics (5 July 1993): 20.

Dementia
A gradual deterioration of mental functioning affecting all areas of cognition, including judgment,
language, and memory.

Dementia generally occurs in the elderly, although it
can appear at any age. Several substantial studies have
been done to determine its prevalence, and in 1991 a
major study was conducted which found that dementia
occurred in just over 1 percent of the population aged 65
to 74; in approximately 4 percent in ages 75 to 84; and
more than doubling to 10.14 percent in persons 85 and
over. Other studies have concluded that many as 47 percent of people over 85 suffer from some form of dementia. Prevalence rates tend to be comparable between the
sexes and across sociocultural barriers, such as education
and class. It is also worth noting that, despite what is
often commonly thought, dementia is not an inevitable
consequence of aging.
Researchers have identified many types of dementia,
including dementia resulting from Alzheimer’s disease,
vascular dementia, substance induced dementia, dementia due to multiple etiologies, dementia due to other general medical conditions, and dementia not otherwise
specified. More than half of the persons diagnosed with
dementia are classified as having dementia resulting
from Alzheimer’s disease. This type of dementia occurs
in more than half of dementia cases in the United States.
There is no definitive method in diagnosing this kind of
dementia until after the patient’s death and an autopsy
can be performed on the brain. Alzheimer-related de172

mentia is characterized by slow deterioration in the initial stages, but the rate of cognitive loss speeds up as the
disease progresses. Patients with this type of dementia
can generally be expected to live eight years.
Vascular dementia is the second most common type
of dementia and is caused by damage to the blood vessels that carry blood to the brain, usually by stroke. Because the area of the brain that is affected differs from
person to person, the pattern of cognitive deterioration in
this type of dementia is unpredictable. Other diseases
that can cause dementia include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, Pick’s disease, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. The
kind of dementia induced by these diseases is known as
subcortical, meaning they affect mainly the interior
structures of the brain, as opposed to cortical dementia
(Alzheimer’s and vascular) which affect the outer layers
of the brain. Many of these subcortical diseases have
been known for some time to result in dementia, but
HIV-related dementia has only recently been described
and diagnosed. Recent studies have indicated that between 29 to 87 percent of people with AIDS show significant signs of dementia.
Generally speaking, dementia has a gradual onset and
can take different routes in different people. All sufferers,
however, are eventually impaired in all areas of cognition.
Initially, dementia can appear in memory loss, which may
result in being able to vividly remember events from many
years past while not being able to remember events of the
very recent past. Other symptoms of dementia are agnosia, which is the technical term for not being able to
recognize familiar objects, facial agnosia, the inability to
recognize familiar faces, and visiospatial impairment, the
inability to locate familiar places.
Along with cognitive deterioration, sufferers of dementia often experience related emotional disorders as
they recognize their deterioration and experience anxiety
about its continuation and worsening. Typical among reactions are depression, anxiety, aggression, and apathy.
Psychologists are uncertain to what extent these symptoms are direct results of dementia or simply responses
to its devastation. Dementia progressively deteriorates
the brain and eventually sufferers are completely unable
to care for themselves and, ultimately, the disease results
in death.
Further Reading
Cooper, James W. Jr. “The Effects of Dementia.” American
Druggist (April 1993): 59.
Crystal, Howard. “Treating Severe Clinical Memory Disorders.” Newsweek (3 May 1993): S6.
“Dementia: When You Suspect a Loved One’s Problem.” Mayo
Clinic Health Letter (November 1995): 6

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)

Dendrite
Nerve cell fibers that receive signals from other
cells.

Dendrites are one of two types of short, threadlike
fibers that extend from the cell body of a nerve cell, or
neuron. The other type are called axons. Dendrites receive electrochemical signals, which are known as postsynaptic potentials, from the axons of other neurons, and
the information contained in these signals is fired across a
synaptic gap or cleft about 0.02 microns or about 8 millionths of an inch wide and transmitted toward the cell
body, with the signals fading as they approach their destination. A single neuron can have many dendrites, each
composed of numerous branches; together, they comprise
the greater part of the neuron’s receptive surface.
The number of axons and dendrites increases dramatically during infancy and childhood—possibly to facilitate the rapid development experienced during this
period—and decrease in early adolescence. A child of
six or seven has more dendrites than an adult.
See also Synapse

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
An organic substance occurring in chromosomes
in the nuclei of cells, which encodes and carries
genetic information, and is the fundamental element of heredity.

As the transmitter of inherited characteristics, deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) replicates itself exactly and
determines the structure of new organisms, which it does
by governing the structure of their proteins. The Swiss
researcher Friedrich Miescher first discovered DNA in
1869 when he extracted a substance (which he called nuclein) containing nitrogen and phosphorus from cell nuclei. The question of whether nucleic acids or proteins,
or both, carried the information that make the genes of
every organism unique was not answered, however, until
the molecular structure of DNA was determined in 1953.
This pioneering work was accomplished by an American
biochemist, James D. Watson, and two British scientists,
Francis Crick, a biochemist, and Maurice Wilkins, a biophysicist. The thousands of genes that make up each
chromosome are composed of DNA, which consists of a
five-carbon sugar (deoxyribose), phosphate, and four
types of nitrogen-containing molecules (adenine, guanine, cytosine, and thymine). The sugar and phosphate
combine to form the outer edges of a double helix, while

A scanning electron micrograph (SEM) of three neurons.
The long thin structures connecting the cells are dendrites.
(Secchi-Lecague/Roussel-UCLAF/CNRI/Science Photo Library.
National Audubon Society Collection/Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced with permission.)

the nitrogen-containing molecules appear in bonded
pairs like rungs of a ladder connecting the outer edges.
They are matched in an arrangement that always pairs
adenine in one chain with thymine in the other, and guanine in one chain with cytosine in the other. A single
DNA molecule may contain several thousand pairs.
The specific order and arrangement of these bonded
pairs of molecules constitute the genetic code of the organism in which they exist by determining, through the
production of ribonucleic acid (RNA), the type of protein produced by each gene, as it is these proteins that
govern the structure and activities of all cells in an organism. Thus, DNA acts as coded message, providing a blueprint for the characteristics of all organisms, including
human beings. When a cell divides to form new life, its
DNA is “copied” by a separation of the two strands of the
double helix, after which complementary strands are synthesized around each existing one. The end result is the
formation of two new double helices, each identical to the
original. All cells of a higher organism contain that organism’s entire DNA pattern. However, only a small percentage of all the DNA messages are active in any cell at
a given time, enabling different cells to “specialize.”
Many viruses are also composed of DNA, which, in
some cases, has a single-strand form rather than the two
strands forming the edges of a double helix. Each particle
of a virus contains only one DNA molecule, ranging in
length from 5,000 to over 200,000 subunits. (The total
length of DNA in a human cell is estimated at five billion
subunits.) Radiation, thermal variations, or the presence of
certain chemicals can cause changes, or “mistakes,” in an
organism’s DNA pattern, resulting in a genetic mutation.
In the course of evolution, such mutations provided the
hereditary blueprints for the emergence of new species.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

173

Dependent personality disorder

decisions and undertaking projects on their own. Their
pervasive reliance on others, even for minor tasks or decisions, makes them exaggeratedly cooperative out of
fear of alienating those whose help they need. They are
reluctant to express disagreement with others and are
often willing to go to abnormal lengths to win the approval of those on whom they rely. Another common
feature of the disorder is an exaggerated fear of being
left to fend for oneself. Adolescents with dependent personality disorder rely on their parents to make even
minor decisions for them, such as what they should wear
or how they should spend their free time, as well as
major ones, such as what college they should attend.

Scan of DNA strands. (Photo by Howard Sochurek. Stock
Market. Reproduced by permission.)

Since the 1970s, scientists have furthered their understanding of the molecular structure of genes through
experiments with recombinant DNA. As its name suggests, this technique combines fragments of DNA from
two different species, allowing an experimenter to purify,
or clone, a gene from one species by inserting it into the
DNA of another, which replicates it together with its
own genetic material. The term “recombinant DNA” also
refers to other laboratory techniques, such as splitting
DNA with microbial enzymes called endonucleases,
splicing fragments of DNA, and even synthesizing it
chemically. Although controversial, gene cloning is an
important scientific accomplishment which has enabled
researchers to gain new understanding of the structure of
genes through the ability to produce an unlimited number of gene copies gathered from a variety of organisms,
including human ones.
See also Heredity
Further Reading
Gribbin, John. In Search of the Double Helix. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1985.

Dependent personality
disorder
A lack of self-confidence coupled with excessive
dependence on others.

Persons affected by dependent personality disorder
have a disproportionately low level of confidence in their
own intelligence and abilities and have difficulty making
174

Dependent personality disorder occurs equally in
males and females and begins by early adulthood. It may
be linked to either chronic physical illness or separation
anxiety disorder earlier in life. The primary treatment
for dependent personality disorder is psychotherapy,
with an emphasis on learning to cope with anxiety, developing assertiveness, and improving decision-making
skills. Group therapy can also be helpful.
Further Reading
Costa, Paul T., and Thomas A. Widiger, eds. Personality Disorders and the Five-Factor Model of Personality. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 1994.
Friedland, Bruce. Personality Disorders. New York: Chelsea
House, 1991.

Dependent variable
The variable measured in an experiment or study;
what the experimenter measures.

When conducting research, a psychologist typically
takes two or more similar groups of people or animals
and exposes them to different treatments or situations.
Then the researcher monitors a behavior of interest to
see whether that behavior differs from one group to the
next. This measurement is the dependent variable. A
single experiment may involve more than one dependent
variable.
When specifying the dependent variable, it must be
clearly defined and measurable. In one experiment, researchers gathered a group of business executives who
displayed evidence of Type A behavior (e.g., nonstop
working, aggressiveness, and competitiveness). The researchers divided the executives into subgroups and either exposed them to a small amount of information regarding the health hazards of such behavior, provided
them with support groups, or offered a course in stress
management. The dependent variable was a score on a

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Levenkron, J. C.; J. D. Cohen; H. S. Mueller; and E. B. Fisher.
“Modifying the Type A Coronary-Prone Behavior Pattern.” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 51
(1983): 192-204.

Depression
An emotional state or mood characterized by one
or more of these symptoms: sad mood, low energy,
poor concentration, sleep or appetite changes,
feelings of worthlessness or hopelessness, and
thoughts of suicide.

Depression may signify a mood, a symptom, or a
syndrome. As a mood, it refers to temporary feelings of
sadness, despair, and discouragement. As a symptom, it
refers to these feelings when they persist and are associated with such problems as decreased pleasure, hopelessness, guilt, and disrupted sleeping and eating patterns.
The entire syndrome is also referred to collectively as a
depression or depressive disorder. At any given time
about 10 percent of all people suffer some of the symptoms of depression at an economic cost of more than $30
billion annually and costs in human suffering that cannot
be estimated. The American Psychiatric Association estimates that about one in five Americans experiences an
episode of depression at least once in his or her lifetime.
Depression can generally be traced to a combination
of physical, psychological, and environmental factors.
Depressive disorders involve a person’s body, mood and
thoughts.
Genetic inheritance makes some people more likely
than others to suffer from depression. More than 60 percent of people who are treated for depression have family members who have been depressed at some time, and
there is a 15 percent chance that immediate biological
relatives of a depressed person will develop depression.
Twin studies have also supported the existence of a genetic predisposition to depression, particularly bipolar
depression. Researchers have found that depression is

associated with changes in brain chemistry. The normal
balance and functioning of two neurotransmitters in particular—serotonin and norepinephrine—appear to be
disrupted in depressed persons, a finding that has led to
the development of a variety of antidepressant drugs. Depression is also associated with an imbalance of cortisol,
the main hormone secreted by the adrenal glands. Other
physiological factors sometimes associated with depression include viral infections, low thyroid levels, and biological rhythms, including women’s menstrual cycles—
depression is a prominent symptom of premenstrual
syndrome (PMS).
Life events, including developmental traumas, physical illness, problems in intimate relationships, and losses may trigger a depression. According to classic psychoanalytic theory, depression is the result of losing
someone through death or abandonment and turning
one’s feelings of anger and resentment inward. For behaviorists, the link between such negative events as the
death of a loved one, the end of a relationship, or the loss
of a job is the removal of a source of reward. Cognitive
theorists claim that depressed people develop destructive
ways of thinking, which include blaming themselves
when things go wrong, focusing on the negative side of
events, and habitually jumping to excessively pessimistic
conclusions.
Another psychological explanation of depression
centers on the concept of learned helplessness, a phenomenon first observed in a laboratory setting when animals that had no control over their situations (such as
changing their situation by pressing a lever) showed
signs of depression. It has been found that lack of control
over their own lives is also associated with depression in
humans and may be especially relevant to depression in
women, whose incidence of depression is twice that of
men. Another factor that may be linked to depression in
women is the tendency to dwell on negative events, a
cognitive style that research has shown to be more common among women than among men, who are more
likely to distract themselves from negative feelings by
engaging in various forms of activity.
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) of
Mental Disorders, produced by the American Psychiatric Association, categorizes depression as an affective,
or mood, disorder. The DSM criterion for clinical depression is the presence of at least five of the following
symptoms almost every day for at least two weeks: depressed mood; loss of interest in activities; significant
changes in appetite or weight; disturbed sleep patterns;
agitated or slowed movements; fatigue; feelings of
worthlessness or inappropriate guilt; trouble concentrating; and preoccupation with death or suicide. In a major
depressive episode, these symptoms can persist for six

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

175

Depression

test that reflected Type A tendencies. Although personality is so complex that it cannot really be described by a
single score, the test for Type A behavior provides a
measurement that is objective and measurable. The executives who took the stress management course scored
lower than those in the support groups; the highest test
scores occurred in the group with the least exposure to
information about stress management. The researchers
concluded that the executives’ test scores, the dependent
variable, changed differently, depending on their group.

Depression

months or longer without treatment. Usually, major depression first occurs in one’s late twenties. In severe
cases, people may be almost completely incapacitated,
losing the ability to work, socialize, and even care for
themselves. The depressive episode may eventually lift
completely, or some symptoms may persist for as long as
two years. More than half the people who suffer from
major depression experience more than one episode. A
serious complication of major depression is the threat of
suicide. Some 60 percent of people who commit suicide
are depressed, and 15 percent of those diagnosed with
depression eventually commit suicide.
In dysthymia, a less severe form of depression, the
symptoms are more prolonged but not disabling. Depressed mood is the major symptom. The depressed
mood lasts at least two years for adults and one year for
children with two or more of the other symptoms of clinical depression present. Bipolar disorder (manic depression) is characterized by the alternation of depression and mania, an overly elated, energetic state. Characteristic symptoms of mania include an inappropriately
cheerful mood; inflated optimism and self-esteem;
grandiose notions; excessive energy with a decreased
need for sleep; racing thoughts; increased talking; and irritability when confronted by obstacles or opposition.
During manic episodes, people characteristically use
poor judgment, make irrational decisions and may even
endanger their own lives. In bipolar disorder, manic
episodes lasting days, weeks, or even months, alternate
with periods of depression. There may be a period of
normalcy between the two or an immediate mood swing
from one mode to the other.
Cyclothymic disorder, the bipolar equivalent of dysthymia, resembles bipolar disorder but consists of a less
extreme pattern of mood swings. Another type of depression, seasonal affective disorder (SAD), follows an annual cycle triggered by seasonal variations in light and usually involves depression during the winter months; it is
thought to be due to an excess of the sleep-inducing hormone melatonin. Sometimes depressions become severe
enough and include features of psychosis. These cases—
which account for about 10 percent of all clinical depressions—are characterized by delusions or hallucinations
and an especially high incidence of suicide.
Most people with clinical depression do not recognize that they have it and fail to seek treatment, blaming
stress or physical ailments for their lack of well-being.
Of those who do seek treatment either through psychotherapy, medication, or a combination of both, 80
percent improve, often within a matter of weeks. Psychotherapy alone is generally more effective for people
with mild or moderate depression, while medication is
advised for those whose depression is more severe or
176

who have developed physical symptoms. Most persons
receiving psychotherapy for their depression undergo
short-term treatment lasting between 12 and 16 weeks.
Treatment methods vary among g different schools of
therapy and individual therapists. Cognitive behavior
therapy focuses on helping patients identify and change
negative thought patterns; interpersonal and family therapies emphasize strategies for improving one’s relationships with others; and behavioral therapy involves monitoring one’s actions and modifying them through a system of incentives and rewards.
Two types of medication traditionally used to treat
depression—tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine
oxidase (MAO) inhibitors—increase the brain’s supply
of certain neurotransmitters, including norepinephrine
and dopamine. Both medications are effective for many
patients but can cause a variety of side effects, particularly MAO inhibitors. In recent years a new generation
of antidepressants has been developed that affects levels
of serotonin rather than norepinephrine. Among these selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) is fluoxetine (Prozac), the most widely used antidepressant in the
United States. It is effective in 60 to 80 percent of those
who take it and has fewer side effects than previous
types of antidepressants. Other SSRIs prescribed include
sertraline (Zoloft) and paroxetine (Paxil). Lithium for
many years has been used to treat manic episodes in persons with bipolar disorder. Other medications found to
help control mood swings are: carbamazepine, which has
gained wide acceptance in clinical practice, and valproate, approved by the Food and Drug Administration
for first-line treatment of acute mania.
Whenever possible, persons suffering from depression should be urged to seek treatment through a private
therapist, clinic, or hospital. There are special treatment
centers for depression at medical centers throughout the
country. A complete physical examination by a family
physician or internist is the first step in getting appropriate treatment. Since certain medications and medical
conditions, such as a viral infection, can cause depression-like symptoms, a physician can rule out these possibilities first.
See also Suicide/Suicidal behavior
Further Reading
Persons, Jacqueline B. Essential Components of Cognitive-Behavior Therapy for Depression. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association, 2000.
Sholevar, G. Pirooz. The Transmission of Depression in Families and Children: Assessment and Intervention. Northvale, N.J.: Aronson, 1994.
Volkan, Vamik D. Depressive states and their treatment.
Northvale, N.J.: J. Aronson, 1994.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Ability to determine visually the distance between
objects.

We can determine the relative distance of objects in
two different ways. One uses cues involving only one
eye; the second requires two eyes. When something is far
from us, we rely on monocular cues, those that require
the use of only one eye. For closer objects, we use both
monocular cues and binocular cues, those that necessitate both eyes.
The ability to perceive depth seems to exist early
in life. Research with infants has revealed that by two
months of age, babies can perceive depth. Prior to
that, they may be unable to do so in part because of
weak eye muscles that do not let them use binocular
depth cues.
Monocular Depth Cues. Psychologists have identified two different kinds of monocular cues. One comes
into play when we use the muscles of the eye to change
the shape of the eye’s lens to focus on an object. We
make use of the amount of muscular tension to give
feedback about distance.
A second kind of monocular cue relates to external
visual stimuli. These cues appear in the table below.
Artists use these visual cues to make two dimensional
paintings appear realistic. These cues may seem obvious

Binocular Cues. Binocular cues require that we
use both eyes. One cue makes use of the fact that when
we look at a nearby object with both eyes, we bring
our eyes together; the muscle tension associated with
looking at close objects gives us information about
their distance. The second binocular cue involves retinal disparity. This means that each eye (or, more
specifically, the retina of each eye) has a slightly different perspective. The slight difference in appearance
of an object in each eye when we gaze at it gives us
further information about depth. Children’s Viewmasters produce a three-dimensional image that has depth
because of a slightly different picture that is delivered
to each eye. In the natural world, because of the relatively small distance from one pupil to another (about
2.5 inches or 6.5 centimeters) binocular cues are effective only for objects that are within about 500 yards
(455 m) of the viewer.
Animals that have eyes on front of the face, like primates, will be able to use binocular depth cues because
the two eyes see almost, but not quite, the same scene;
on the other hand, animals with eyes on the side of the
head, like most birds, will be less able to use binocular
cues because the visual fields of the two eyes do not
overlap very much and each eye sees different scenes.

MONOCULAR CUE—HOW IT WORKS
Aerial Perspective

Objects that are near seem crisper and clearer; far away
objects appear fuzzier.

Height in Plane

Objects that are farther away appear higher in the visual
scene.

Interposition

Objects that are nearer block objects that are farther
away.

Linear Perspective

Lines that are parallel (e.g., railroad tracks) look like they
come to a point in the distance. The farther the lines, the
closer they are.

Motion Parallax

When you are moving and you fixate on a spot, objects
closer to you than that spot appear to move in the direction opposite to your motion; objects farther than that
spot appear to move in the same direction as you are
moving.

Relative Size

If two objects are of the same size, the closer one is bigger.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

177

Depth perception

Depth perception

to us now, but artistic renderings from earlier than about
the sixteenth century often seem distorted because artists
had not yet developed all the techniques to capture these
visual cues.

René Descartes

René Descartes
1596-1650
French philosopher and mathematician whose
ideas included early and significant contributions
to the field of psychology.

Descartes was born in France, near the small village
of Le Haye. From the age of 10, he attended the most
prestigious school in France, the Royal Collège of La
Flèche, graduating at the age of 16. After spending some
time sampling the amusements of Parisian society, followed by a period of solitary studies in philosophy and
mathematics, Descartes briefly served as a soldier on the
eve of the Thirty Years’ War, joining first the Protestant
and then the Catholic forces. Returning to the study of
science and philosophy after the war, he spent several
more years in Paris before moving to Holland at the age
of 32. There Descartes wrote his most important works,
Discourse on Method (1637), Meditations on First Philosophy (1642), and Principles of Philosophy (1644).
Because his books aroused controversy among the Dutch
Protestant clergy, Descartes, already wary after Galileo’s
condemnation by the Inquisition, published little for the
remainder of his life, confining his thoughts largely to
unpublished manuscripts and letters. His last published
work was the Passions of the Soul (1649). Descartes remained in Holland for most of his life, although he
moved frequently during his time there. In 1649, he left
for Sweden at the invitation of Queen Christina and undertook to tutor her in philosophy. Only months after arriving in Sweden, Descartes died at the age of 53.
Descartes’s philosophy is known for its glorification
of human reason. He began with the premise that the only
way to be sure of anything is to doubt everything (“I resolved to reject as false everything in which I could imagine the least doubt, in order to see if there afterwards remained anything that was entirely indubitable”). In so
doing, Descartes arrived at the conclusion that the one
thing he could be sure of was his own act of doubting—a
mental process. From the certainty expressed in the famous statement, “I think, therefore I am,” he built a philosophy that gave to the workings of the individual mind
priority over both immediate sensory experience and received wisdom. Descartes postulated a radical mind-body
dualism, claiming that the universe consisted of two utterly distinct substances: mind (“thinking substance” or
res cogitans) and matter (“physical substance” or res extensa ). Thus, he separated mental phenomena from the
comprehensive mechanistic explanation he gave for the
workings of matter and material things, including the
human body, which he divided into ten physiological systems. These included such faculties as memory and
178

René Descartes (The Library of Congress. Reproduced by
permission.)

imagination, along with the purely physiological functions of digestion, circulation, and respiration.
Descartes believed the primary site of interaction
between mind and body to be the pineal gland (which he
incorrectly thought to be unique to humans). He held
that the will, an aspect of the mind, can move the pineal
gland and cause the transmission of what he called animal spirits, which produce mechanical changes in the
body; and, similarly, that changes in the body are transmitted to the pineal gland and can there affect the mind.
His rationalistic ideas provided a basis for the Enlightenment and became the dominant system of philosophy
until the work of David Hume (1711-1776) and Immanuel Kant (1724-1804). While many of Descartes’s
individual arguments have since been discredited, his
overall view of the dualism between mind and body has
been a powerful influence on succeeding generations of
philosophers and psychologists.
Further Reading
Popper, K., and J. Eccles. The Self and Its Brain. London, 1977.
Smith, Norman Kemp. New Studies in the Philosophy of
Descartes. New York: Russell and Russell, 1963.
Vrooman, J. R. Rene Descartes: A Biography. New York: Putnam, 1970.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

A behavior modification technique used to combat
phobias and other irrational fears.

Developed by Joseph Wolpe in the 1950s, desensitization is a treatment method which weakens the learned
association between anxiety and feared objects or situations by strengthening another response—in this case, relaxation—that is incompatible with anxiety. Relaxation
responses are strengthened through progressive relaxation training, first developed by Edmund Jacobson in the
1930s. Clients first tighten and then relax 16 different
muscle groups in various parts of the body, releasing the
tension and focusing on the resulting feelings of relaxation. Once people learn how their muscles feel when
they are truly relaxed, they develop the ability to reproduce this state voluntarily and in a variety of situations.
Next, the client outlines an “anxiety hierarchy,” a
list of situations or stimuli arranged in order from least
to most anxiety-provoking. For a person who is afraid of
flying, such a list might begin with seeing a picture of an
airplane, eventually progress to driving to the airport,
and end with taking an actual plane flight. With the aid
of the therapist, the client then works through the list, either imagining or actually experiencing each situation
while in a state of relaxation. When tolerance for each
listed item is established, the client moves on to the next
one. As clients face progressively more threatening situations, relaxation rather than fear becomes associated
with the source of their anxiety, and they become gradually desensitized to it. While exposure through mental
imagery does produce desensitization, actual real-life
exposure to the feared stimulus whenever possible is
more effective.
Further Reading
Craighead, W. Edward. Behavior Modification: Principles, Issues, and Applications. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1976.
Skinner, B.F. About Behaviorism. New York: Knopf, 1974.
Wolpe, Joseph. The Practice of Behavior Therapy. Tarrytown,
NY: Pergamon Press, 1990.

Determinism
A scientific perspective which specifies that events
occur in completely predictable ways as a result of
natural and physical laws.

Since ancient times, the origins of human behavior
have been attributed to hidden or mystical forces. The
Greek philosopher Democritus speculated, for example,

There is a clear dilemma in explaining human behavior through psychological principles. On the one
hand, if psychology is a science of behavior, then there
should be laws allowing the prediction of behavior, just
as there are gravitational laws to predict the behavior of
a falling object. On the other hand, objections have been
raised by individuals who believe that humans control
their own behaviors and possess free will. Part of the
controversy relates to the concept of the mind and body
as separate entities. In this view, the mind may not be
subject to the same laws as the body. Wilhelm Wundt
(1832-1920) attempted to make the distinction between
determinism and indeterminism by suggesting that psychological processes could be creative and free, whereas
the physiological processes in the brain were deterministic. This argument does not solve the problem for psychology, however, because psychologists consider mental processes appropriate for study within a scientific
framework, thus subject to scientific laws.
Other psychologists like William James, who was
interested in religion and believed in free will, recognized this conflict but was reluctant to abandon the concept that behaviors were not free. At one point, he suggested that mind and body operated in tandem, whereas
on another occasion he concluded that they interacted.
Clearly, James struggled with the issue and, like others,
was unable to resolve it. The behaviorists were the most
obvious proponents of determinism, dating back to John
B. Watson, who claimed that environment was the single cause of behavior, and who made one of the most famous deterministic assertions ever: “Give me a dozen
healthy infants . . . and my own specified world to bring
them up in and I’ll guarantee to take anyone at random
and train him to become any type of specialist I might
select—doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant, chief, and, yes,
even beggar man and thief.”
The psychologist with the greatest influence in this
area, however, was B. F. Skinner. He adopted a stance
called radical behaviorism, which disregarded free will
and the internal causes of behavior. All behavior, Skinner
maintained, was determined through reinforcement
contingencies, that is, the pattern of reinforcements and
punishments in an individual’s life. Although critics have
claimed that Skinner’s concept of determinism denied

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

179

Determinism

Desensitization

that objects in our world consist of atoms; included
among these “objects” was the soul, which was made of
finer, smoother, and more spherical atoms than other
physical objects. He rejected the concept of free will and
claimed that all human behavior results from prior
events. Some philosophers have advanced the argument
that human behavior is deterministic, although most have
resisted the idea that human beings merely react to external events and do not voluntarily select behaviors.

Developmental delay

people of their humanity, he maintained that his approach could actually lead to more humane societies. For
example, if people were not responsible for negative behaviors, they should not be punished, for they had no
control over their behaviors. Instead, the environment
that reinforced the unwanted behaviors should be
changed so that desirable behaviors receive reinforcement and increase in frequency.
Sigmund Freud defined determinism in terms of
the unconscious and contended that behavior is caused
by internal, mental mechanisms. In some ways, Freud
was more extreme than Skinner, who acknowledged that
some behaviors are not predictable. The main difference
between Freud and Skinner involved the origin of causation; Freud believed in underlying physiological processes while Skinner opted to focus on external causes. Thus,
even though Freudians and Skinnerians differ on almost
every conceivable dimension, they have at least one
commonality in their reliance on determinism.
Those scientists who believe that behaviors are determined have recognized the difficulty in making explicit predictions. Thus, they have developed the concept
of statistical determinism. This means that, even though
behaviors are determined by fixed laws, predictions will
never be perfect because so many different factors, most
of them unknown, affect actions, which result in generally accurate predictions. The recently developed theory of
chaos relates to making predictions about complex
events such as behaviors. This theory suggests that in a
cause-effect situation, small differences in initial conditions may lead to very different outcomes. This theory
supports the notion that behaviors may not be completely predictable even though they may be dictated by fixed
natural laws.
Further Reading
Doob, Leonard William. Inevitability: Determinism, Fatalism,
and Destiny. New York: Greenwood Press, 1988.

Developmental delay
Any delay in a child’s physical, cognitive, behavioral, emotional, or social development, due to any
number of reasons.

Developmental delay refers to any significant retardation in a child’s physical, cognitive, behavioral, emotional, or social development. The two most frequent
reasons for classing a child as having developmental
delay involve those psychological systems for which
there are good norms. This is especially true for motor
development and language development. Because it is
180

known that all children begin to crawl by eight months
of age and walk by the middle of the second year, any
child who was more than five or six months delayed in
attaining those two milestones would probably be classified as developmentally delayed and the parents should
consult the pediatrician.
Most children begin to speak their first words before
they are eighteen months old and by three years of age
the vast majority are speaking short sentences. Therefore, any child who is not speaking words or sentences
by the third birthday would be considered developmentally delayed and, as in motor development delay, the
parent should consult the pediatrician.
The other developmental problems that children
show are more often called disabilities rather than delays.
Thus, the small group of children with autism do not
show normal social development but these children are
usually called disabled or autistic rather than developmentally delayed. Similarly, most children are able to
read single words by the second grade of elementary
school. Children who cannot do that are normally labeled
dyslexic or learning disabled, or in some cases academically delayed, rather than developmentally delayed.
Physical development is assessed by progress in both
fine and gross motor skills. Possible problems are indicated by muscles that are either too limp or too tight. Jerky
or uncertain movements are another cause for concern, as
are abnormalities in reflexes. Delays in motor development may indicate the presence of a neurological condition such as mild cerebral palsy or Tourette’s syndrome.
Neurological problems may also be present when a child’s
head circumference is increasing either too fast or too
slowly. Although physical and cognitive delays may occur
together, one is not necessarily a sign of the other.
Important cognitive attainments that physicians look
for in infants in the first 18 months include object permanence, an awareness of causality, and different reactions
to strangers and family members. Cognitive delays can
signal a wide variety of problems, including fetal alcohol syndrome and brain dysfunction. Developmental
milestones achieved and then lost should also be investigated, as the loss of function could be sign of a degenerative neurological condition.
Delays in social and emotional development can be
among the most difficult for parents, who feel rejected by
a child’s failure to respond to them on an emotional level.
They expect such responses to social cues as smiling, vocalization, and cuddling, and may feel angry or frustrated
when their children do not respond. However, a delay in
social responses can be caused by a number of factors, including prenatal stress or deprivation, prematurity, birth
difficulties, including oxygen deprivation, or a hypersen-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Many physicians routinely include developmental
screening in physical examinations. Parents concerned
about any aspect of their child’s development are generally advised to seek the opinion of a pediatrician or appropriate specialist. Specific assessment instruments
such as the Gesell Development Scales and the Bayley
Scales of Infant Development are used to help determine whether an infant is developing at a rate appropriate to the child’s age.
Further Reading
Haskell, Simon H. The Education of Children with Motor and
Neurological Disabilities. New York: Nichols, 1989.
Sugden, David A. Problems in Movement Skill Development.
Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press, 1990.

Developmental reading
disorder
A condition in which reading ability is significantly
below the norm in relation to chronological age
and overall intellectual potential.

Also referred to as reading disability, reading difficulty, and dyslexia, developmental reading disorder is
the most commonly diagnosed learning disability in
the United States. Estimates of its prevalence vary widely, ranging from 4% of children—the figure given by
the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual—to 20%, the figure given by a
1995 study directed by Sally E. Shaywitz of Yale University. According to the latter figure, some 10 million
children in the United States have some form of reading
disability.
Reading disabilities are diagnosed up to five times
more frequently in boys than girls, although some
sources claim that this figure is misleading because boys
are more likely to be screened for learning disabilities
due to their higher incidence of disruptive behavior,
which draws the attention of educators and other professionals. Most reading disabilities were formerly grouped
together under the term dyslexia, which has largely fallen out of favor with educators and psychologists because
of confusion over widespread and inconsistent use of the
term in both broad and narrower contexts. Developmental reading disorder is distinct from alexia, which is the
term for reading difficulties caused by brain damage
from injury or disease. However, neurological studies of
alexia have helped researchers better understand reading
disabilities.

Types of and causes of reading disorders
Reading disabilities have been classified as either
dyseidetic, dysphonetic, or mixed. Children with the dyseidetic type are able to sound out individual letters phonetically but have trouble identifying patterns of letters
when they are grouped together. By comparison, dysphonic readers have difficulty relating letters to sounds,
so their spelling is totally chaotic. Children with mixed
reading disabilities have both the dyseidetic and dysphonic types of reading disorder.
A variety of causes have been advanced for developmental reading disorder. Researchers favoring a biological explanation have cited heredity, minimal brain dysfunction, delays in neurological development, and failure of the right and left hemispheres to function properly
together.
Developmental reading disorder is often identified in
the first grade, when reading instruction begins. Children
with reading disabilities lag behind their peers in reading
progress and have serious spelling problems. They also
tend to have trouble writing (many have poor handwriting), have an unusually small vocabulary, and favor activities that do not require verbal skills. Also, like children
with other learning disabilities, those with developmental
reading disorder often earn poor grades and dislike
school, reading, and homework. Even at the preschool
stage, there are certain problems, such as trouble sounding out words and difficulty understanding words or concepts, which may foreshadow a reading disability.
The outcome of treatment for reading disabilities
varies, depending on the quality of the remedial reading
program, the severity of the disorder, and the motivation
and intelligence of the child. Given the proper remedial
help, some children with reading disabilities have been
able to successfully complete high school, college, and
even graduate school, while others have been forced to
limit their vocational choices to fields that do not demand strong literacy skills. Factors that have been found
to contribute to the success of treatment include early intervention (elementary rather than secondary school); an
IQ over 90; instruction by qualified reading specialists;
and a total of over 50 hours of instruction.
Further Reading
Goldsworthy, Candace L. Developmental Reading Disorders:
A Language-Based Treatment Approach. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, 1996.
Lipson, Marjorie Y. and Karen K. Wixson. Assessment and Instruction of Reading Disability: An Interactive Approach.
New York: HarperCollins, 1991.
Manzo, Ula C. Literacy Disorders: Holistic Diagnosis and Remediation. Fort Worth: Harcourt, Brace Jovanovitch,
1993.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

181

Developmental reading disorder

sitivity of the nervous system (which creates an aversion
to stimuli that are normally tolerated or welcomed).

Developmental psychology

Further Information
Dyslexia Research Foundation. 600 Northern Boulevard, Great
Neck, NY 11021, (516) 482–2888.
The Learning Disabilities Association of America. 4156 Library Rd., Pittsburgh, PA 15234, (412) 341–1515.
Nation Center for Learning Disabilities, Inc. (NCLD). 99 Park
Ave., 6th Floor, New York, NY 10016, (212) 687–7211
Orton Dyslexia Society. 8600 LaSalle Road, Chester Building,
Suite 382, Baltimore, MD 21286-2044, (410) 296–0232,
information line: (800) ABC-D123.

Developmental psychology
A field of psychology which examines how human
behavior changes as a person matures through focusing on biological, emotional, physical, cognitive, and social changes that are age-related, sequential, and long-lasting.

Developmental psychologists study how characteristics and behaviors first appear and how and when they
change. They study the relationships between different
types of development, such as cognitive and social, as
well as individual variations in development, both normal and deviant. Initially, developmental psychology focused on childhood but was subsequently expanded to
cover changes that occur over the entire life span, from
the intrauterine environment through childhood, adolescence, middle age, and maturity. Three processes that
play a central role in development are growth, maturation, and learning. Growth refers to physical changes
that are quantitative, such as increases in height or
weight. Maturation involves anatomical, neurophysiological, and chemical transformations that change the
way a person functions (such as a woman’s passage into
or out of childbearing age). Learning involves relatively
long-term changes in behavior or performance acquired
through observation, experience, or training.
One of the oldest questions in developmental psychology involves the nature-nurture controversy,
which asks how and to what degree nature (inherited or
genetic factors influencing development) contributes to a
person’s biological, emotional, cognitive, and social development, and to what degree it is the result of nurture
(the influence of learning and experience in the environment). This issue has been debated for centuries by
philosophers, who often argued strenuously for the predominance of one influence over the other (a famous example is the British philosopher John Locke’s concept of
the newborn human being as a blank slate, or tabula
rasa, to be formed by experience). Pioneered by the
American psychologist Arnold Gesell, the concept of
maturation, which is central to developmental psycholo182

gy, stresses the role of nature in human development.
Gesell observed that the motor skills of children develop
in a fixed order through a series of stages relatively unaffected by outside influences. The interplay of nature and
nurture, rather than the importance of one over the other,
however, has gained a greater emphasis in the work of
more recent figures, notably the Swiss psychologist Jean
Piaget, whose theory of cognitive development in children has been a model for much subsequent work in the
field. Going beyond simplistic dichotomies, scientists
have been able to gather substantial amounts of specific
data on the effects of heredity and environment through
family, twin, and adoption studies. Current concepts of
maturation focus on models in which each stage of a developmental process is defined not only by innate characteristics but also by increased receptivity (or “readiness”) toward certain environmental factors.
Another significant issue in the field of developmental psychology is the question of continuity versus
stages, specifically, does an individual’s development
occur in a gradual and progressive (continuous) fashion,
or in a distinct series of discrete stages? In his pioneering
theory of cognitive development, Piaget delineated a sequence of developmental stages that occur in a fixed
order with each dependent on the previous ones (sensorimotor, preoperational, concrete operational, and formal
operational). Subsequent research has challenged some
of his assumptions, finding in some cases that children
are capable of advanced thinking at younger ages than
those posited by Piaget. Observations such as these have
led to the conclusion that cognitive development is more
uneven and less systematic than previously thought, and
that children’s reasoning abilities in a specific situation
may depend on variables—familiarity with certain objects, language comprehension, and prior experiences—
that are not part of Piaget’s system. One recent model
advances the notion of cognitive development in “pockets” rather than globally uniform levels or stages. Another alternative that has been suggested is an information
processing model focusing on gradual quantitative advances in memory and other learning abilities rather
than qualitative progress through a series of stages.
In addition to Piaget, another major influence in the
area of human development was Erik Erikson, whose
eight stages of psychosocial development, encompassing
the entire life span from infancy through old age, inspired an interest in the continuation of development past
childhood. Erikson’s work also popularized the concept
of the adolescent “identity crisis” (a term he coined). Yet
another type of development that has gained increased
interest in recent years is moral development, which
has been most extensively investigated by Lawrence
Kohlberg. Presenting subjects with hypothetical moral

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Cognitive development; Cognitive psychology; Information-processing theory
Further Reading
Anderson, Clifford. The Stages of Life: A Groundbreaking Discovery: the Steps to Psychological Maturity. New York:
Atlantic Monthly Press, 1995.
Berger, Kathleen Stassen. The Developing Person Through the
Life Span. 2nd ed. New York: Worth Publishers, 1988.
Cicchetti, Dante, and Donald J. Cohen, eds. Developmental
Psychopathology. New York: J. Wiley, 1995.

STAGES OF DEVELOPMENT
ERIK ERIKSON

”Trust versus mistrust” from birth to 18 months
”Autonomy versus shame” from one-and-a-half to
three years
”Initiative versus guilt” from three to six years
”Industry versus inferiority” from six to 12 years.
JEAN PIAGET

”Sensorimotor stage” from birth to two years
”Preoperational stage” from two to seven years
”Concrete operational stage” from seven to 12
years
”Formal operational stage” from 13 to adult.
LAWRENCE KOHLBERG

”Preconventional stage,” where moral decisions
are based on how they themselves are affected
”Conventional stage,” where moral judgments are
based on the conventions of society, family, religion, or
other social order (Many people do not pass beyond
this stage.)
”Post-conventional level,” where moral judgments
are based on personal beliefs.

Developmental stages,
theories of
The various stages developmental psychologists
theorize people go through as they develop from
early life into childhood and beyond.

Developmental psychologists, by and large, study
the way humans develop from an embryo into a full
grown adult, focusing mainly on the factors that contribute to intelligence, personality, morality, and
lifestyle. Of special interest are the effects certain stimuli
have on the development of humans. For instance, does
genetics pre-program a person to be introverted, or is
that personality trait the result of specific life events that
caused him or her to retreat inward? Or, did intense
study of music from an early age make someone a gifted
musician, or is that something their genes had pre-programmed from the moment of conception?
Over the past hundred years or so, several prominent psychologists and psychiatrists have devised various theories seeking to quantify the developmental
stages humans pass through, and in doing so, have
sought to map out this difficult process. One of the more

famous theories of developmental psychology was put
forth by the psychological theorist Erik Erikson in
1963 in his important work Childhood and Society. In
this work, Erikson suggests that psychosocial development, the changing ways we perceive ourselves individually and in relation to society, occurs in eight stages—
only four of which deal with childhood. The first of
Erikson’s stages is “trust versus mistrust” and occurs
from birth to 1 years. The child formulates either a trusting or mistrusting relationship to the world around it,
based on whether its immediate needs are met. These
needs, at this young age, generally have to do with satisfaction of physical cravings (food, sleep, and comfort)
and for feelings of attachment.
The second stage of development Erikson called
“autonomy versus shame” and doubt—occurring between 1 and 3 years of age. Here, young children learn to
be independent and autonomous on the condition that
they are adequately encouraged to explore their world
and given the freedom to do so. On the other hand, children with overly restrictive or anxious parents who wield
too great an influence over their children’s behavior, sti-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

183

Developmental stages, theories of

dilemmas, Kohlberg found that moral reasoning in children develops through three distinct levels (consisting of
two stages each) between the age of seven and adolescence. Like Piaget’s theory, Kohlberg’s stages do not
necessarily occur at a given age but they do occur consistently in a given order. Also, not all individuals reach the
final stage, at which following rules and obeying the social order is superseded by the imperative of the individual conscience to obey ethical principles that may transcend the law. The universality of some of Kohlberg’s
findings has been challenged in terms of applicability to
non-Western cultures and women (Kohlberg’s research
focused on men). When Carol Gilligan questioned subjects about moral conflicts, the reactions of male and female respondents differed significantly, and Gilligan
drew up her own model for women.

John Dewey

fling creativity and independent exploration of their environment, become shameful and self doubting.
Between the ages of three and six, children pass
through the stage Erikson refers to as “initiative versus
guilt.” During this period of development, children seek
to further explore their world by initiating new experiences. The guilt comes about when there are unexpected
consequences involved in these initiations. The final
stage of childhood development is called “industry versus inferiority,” and it lasts from age six to 12. Here,
children seek to become industrious in all areas of life,
from school to interpersonal relations. Mastery of these
skills, with adequate support at home and in school,
brings about a sense of overall competence, whereas failure brings about a sense of inferiority.
Another prominent theorist in developmental psychology was Jean Piaget, who developed the four stages
of cognitive development. He theorized that people pass
from one stage to another not just as a matter of course,
but only when they are confronted with the correct type
of stimulation to initiate a change. Piaget believed that in
the absence of the correct kinds of stimulation, children
would never reach their full potential.
According to Piaget, from birth to two years of age,
children are in the “sensorimotor” stage of cognitive development. During this stage, children first begin to develop motor skills. They also have little or no ability for
what is called symbolic representation, that is, the ability
to conceive of things existing outside of their immediate
vicinity. Piaget called this ability object permanence. Piaget’s next stage is called “preoperational” (from ages
two to seven). In this stage, children begin to use language and other representational systems to conceive of,
and even discuss, things or people who are not physically
present. The chief marker of this stage is what Piaget
called egocentric thought. That is, preoperational children
can conceive of things that are not present, but they can
not conceive of others perceiving what they can not. The
classic example of this kind of thinking is the young child
who in order to hide simply covers his eyes, thinking that
since he can no longer see, no one else can either.
Piaget’s next stage is called “concrete operational”
and covers the years 7 to 12. Here, children begin to develop clearer methods of thinking, and they start to overcome the egocentrism of the preoperational stage. They
begin to better understand spatial relationships and matters of time, but they are largely bound by the concrete
world and have trouble conceiving abstract thought. During the formal operational stage, from age 12 to adulthood, people develop the ability to think logically and systematically and to understand abstractions and the concepts of causality and choice. They see that different out184

comes can proceed from different actions, and that they
are free to choose between various actions depending on a
desired outcome. According to Piaget, and to many who
believe in his framework, not everyone reaches this stage
of cognitive development. Some researchers assert that as
few as 25 percent of the general population reaches the
formal operational stage. Still others suggest that it is a
culture-based phenomena and that in less technological
societies, almost no one reaches the stage—mainly because such thinking is not valued or even necessary.
A final theory dealing with developmental psychology was devised by Lawrence Kohlberg and presented
in his 1981 book The Philosophy of Moral Development:
Moral Stages and the Idea of Justice. Kohlberg’s stages
deal with how children formulate moral reasoning at various stages of cognitive development. He called the earliest stage the “preconventional.” Here, children base
moral decisions on how they themselves are affected.
Something is “right,” in other words, if they are not likely to be punished for doing it. The next level is the “conventional” stage. During this stage, people base their
moral judgments on the conventions of society (or of
family or religion or some other social order). Something
is “right” during this stage of development if it is something most people would agree is right. Many people do
not pass beyond the conventional level of moral reasoning. If they do, they arrive at what Kohlberg calls the
“post-conventional level,” where moral judgments are
based on personal beliefs. People in this stage of moral
development will do what they consider is “right” even
if it contradicts social norms.
See also Cognitive development; Psychosexual stages
Further Reading
Marse, Michele Black. “Is My Child Normal?” Parents’ Magazine (September 1991): 68.

John Dewey
1859-1952
American philosopher, educator, and psychologist
who made significant contributions to the establishment of the school of functional psychology.

John Dewey was born near Burlington, Vermont.
After receiving his B.A. from the University of Vermont,
he taught high school and studied philosophy independently before entering the graduate program in philosophy
at Johns Hopkins University. After receiving his Ph.D. in
1884, Dewey served on the faculties of the University of
Michigan, the University of Minnesota, the University of
Chicago, and Columbia University. Dewey was a founder

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Dewey was also an educational reformer and a pioneer in the field of educational psychology. Paralleling
his philosophical and psychological theories, his concept
of instrumentalism in education stressed learning by
doing, as opposed to authoritarian teaching methods and
rote learning. Dewey’s ideas have remained at the center
of much educational philosophy in the United States.
While at the University of Chicago, Dewey founded an
experimental school to develop and study new educational methods, a project that won him both fame and
controversy. He experimented with educational curricula
and methods, successfully combining theory and practice, and also pioneered in advocating parental participation in the educational process. His first influential book
on education, The School and Society (1899), was adapted from a series of lectures to parents of the pupils in his
school at the University of Chicago. During his time at
Columbia, he continued working on the applications of
psychology to problems in education, and his work influenced educational ideas and practices throughout the
world.
John Dewey (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

of the philosophical movement called pragmatism, and his
writings on educational theory and practice were widely
read and accepted. He held that the disciplines of philosophy, pedagogy, and psychology should be understood as
closely interrelated. Dewey came to believe in an “instrumentalist” theory of knowledge, in which ideas are seen to
exist primarily as instruments for the solution of problems
encountered in the environment.
Dewey’s work at the University of Chicago between
1894 and 1904—together with that of his colleague,
Rowland Angell (1869-1949)—made that institution a
world-renowned center of the functionalist movement in
psychology. Dewey’s functionalism was influenced by
Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution, as well as by the
ideas of William James and by Dewey’s own instrumentalist philosophy. His 1896 paper, “The Reflex Arc Concept in Psychology,” is generally considered the first
major statement establishing the functionalist school. In
this work, Dewey attacked the prevailing reductionist
methods of such figures as Wilhelm Wundt (18321920) and Edward Titchener (1867-1927), who used
stimulus-response analysis as the basis for psychological
theories that reduced human experience to the simplest
and most basic units possible. Dewey considered their
approach flawed because it ignored both the continuity

Dewey wrote the first American psychology textbook, titled Psychology (1886), which was followed by
William James’s The Principles of Psychology four years
later. Dewey served as president of the American Psychological Association from 1899 to 1900 and was the
first president of the American Association of University
Professors in 1915. In 1920 he helped organize the
American Civil Liberties Union. In the following years,
Dewey surveyed educational practices in several foreign
countries, including Turkey, Mexico, and the Soviet
Union. After his retirement in 1930, Dewey continued
his writing and his advocacy of political and educational
causes, including the advancement of adult education.
Among Dewey’s large body of writings are: Applied
Psychology: An Introduction to the Principles and Practice of Education (1889), Interest as Related to Will
(1896), Studies in Logical Theory (1903), How We Think
(1910), Democracy and Education (1916), Experience
and Nature (1925), Philosophy and Civilization (1931),
Experience and Education (1938), and Freedom and
Culture (1939).
See also Assessment, psychological
Further Reading
Boydston, Jo Ann. Guide to the Works of John Dewey. Edwardsville, IL:Southern Illinois University Press, 1972.
Hook, Sidney. John Dewey: An Intellectual Portrait. New
York: John Day Co., 1939.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

185

John Dewey

of human behavior and its significance in terms of adaptation. In contrast, functionalism sought to consider the
total organism as it functioned in the environment—an
active perceiver rather than a passive receiver of stimuli.

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV)

Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-IV)
A reference work developed by the American Psychiatric Association and designed to provide guidelines for the diagnosis and classification of mental
disorders.

The American Psychiatric Association publishes
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, widely referred to as DSM-IV, a reference work de-

signed to provide guidelines for psychologists and others
to use in the diagnosis and classification of mental disorders. The latest edition, DSM-IV, serves as a reference to
psychiatrists, other physicians and mental health professionals, psychologists, social workers, and others in
clinical, educational, and social service settings.
First published in 1917, each new edition of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders has
added new categories. With the third edition, published in
1980, the DSM began recommending assessment of mental disorders according to five axes, or dimensions, that
together establish an overall picture of a person’s mental,

CLASSIFICATION OF MENTAL DISORDERS
DISORDERS USUALLY FIRST DIAGNOSED IN
INFANCY, CHILDHOOD, OR ADOLESCENCE

• Nicotine-related disorders
• Opioid-related disorders

• Mental retardation
• Learning disorders
• Motor skill disorder
• Communication disorders
• Pervasive developmental disorders
• Attention-deficit and disruptive behavior disorders
• Feeding and eating disorders of infancy or early
childhood
• Tic disorders
• Elimination disorders
• Other disorders of infancy, childhood, or adolescence

• Delirium
• Dementia
• Amnestic disorders
• Other cognitive disorders

186

SCHIZOPHRENIA AND OTHER PSYCHOTIC
DISORDERS
MOOD DISORDERS

• Depressive disorders
• Bipolar disorders
ANXIETY DISORDERS

SEXUAL AND GENDER IDENTITY DISORDERS

MENTAL DISORDERS DUE TO A GENERAL MEDICAL
CONDITION NOT ELSEWHERE CLASSIFIED

• Alcohol-related disorders
• Amphetamine use disorders
• Amphetamine-induced disorders
• Caffeine-related disorders
• Cannabis-related disorders
• Cocaine-related disorders
• Hallucinogen-related disorders
• Inhalent-related disorders

• Sedative-, hypnotic-, or anxiolytic-related disorders
• Polysubstance-related disorder
• Other, or unknown substance-related disorder

• Somatoform disorders
• Factitious disorders
• Dissociative disorders

DELIRIUM, DEMENTIA, AND AMNESTIC AND
OTHER COGNITIVE DISORDERS

SUBSTANCE-RELATED DISORDERS

PHENCYCLIDINE-RELATED DISORDERS

• Sexual dysfunctions
• Paraphilias
• Gender identity disorders
EATING DISORDERS
SLEEP DISORDERS

• Primary sleep disorders
• Sleep disorders related to another mental disorder
IMPULSE-CONTROL DISORDERS NOT ELSEWHERE
CLASSIFIED
ADJUSTMENT DISORDERS
PERSONALITY DISORDERS
OTHER CONDITIONS

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Axis I lists 14 major clinical syndromes. These include disorders usually first diagnosed in childhood or
adolescence (hyperactivity, mental retardation,
autism); dementia, amnesia, and other cognitive disorders; substance-related disorders; schizophrenia and
other conditions characterized by abnormalities in thinking, perception, and emotion; and sexual and gender
identity disorders. Also listed in Axis I are mood, anxiety, somatoform, dissociative, eating, sleep, impulse
control, and adjustment disorders, as well as factitious
(false) disorders.
Axis II is for assessment of personality disorders—
lifelong, deeply ingrained patterns of behavior that are
destructive to those who display them or to others. Some
examples are narcissistic, dependent, avoidant, and antisocial personality types. This axis also includes developmental disorders in children.
Axis III considers any organic medical problems
that may be present. The fourth axis includes any environmental or psychosocial factors affecting a person’s
condition (such as the loss of a loved one, sexual abuse,
divorce, career changes, poverty, or homelessness).
In Axis V, the diagnostician assesses the person’s
level of functioning within the previous 12 months on a
scale of 1 to 100.
One notable feature of DSM-IV is that it dispenses
with two previously ubiquitous terms in the field of psychology—“neurosis” and “psychosis”—because they
are now considered too vague. The term “neurosis” was
generally used for a variety of conditions that involved
some form of anxiety, whereas “psychosis” referred to
conditions in which the patient had lost the ability to
function normally in daily life and/or had lost touch with
reality. Conditions that would formerly have been described as neurotic are now found in five Axis I classifications: mood disorders, anxiety disorders, somatoform
disorders, dissociative identity disorders, and sexual
disorders. Conditions formerly referred to as psychotic
are now found in Axis I as well. Besides diagnostic criteria, the DSM-IV also provides information about mental
and emotional disorders, covering areas such as probable
cause, average age at onset, possible complications,
amount of impairment, prevalence, gender ratio, predisposing factors, and family patterns.
DSM-IV contains the results of a comprehensive and
systematic review of relevant published literature, in-

MULTIAXIAL
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
• Axis I – Clinical disorders; other conditions that
may be a focus of clinical attention
• Axis II – Personality disorders; mental retardation
• Axis III – General medical conditions
• Axis IV – Psychosocial and enviromental problems
• Axis V – Global assessment of functioning.

cluding earlier editions of DSM. In cases where the evidence of a literature review was found to be insufficient
to resolve a particular question, data sets were reanalyzed and issue-focused field trials were conducted.
These literature reviews, data reanalyses, and field trials
that form the basis of DSM-IV have been fully documented, condensed, and published separately as a reference record in a five-volume set entitled DSM-IV
Sourcebook. The DSM-IV Sourcebook also contains executive summaries of the rationales for the final decisions relative to inclusion in DSM-IV.
Further Reading
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th
edition. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association, 1994.
DSM-IV Sourcebook. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric
Association, 1994. In five volumes, contains documentation of all work leading to criteria published in DSM-IV,
and includes executive summaries of the rationales for
final decisions made in compiling the work.

Differential psychology
The area of psychology concerned with measuring
and comparing differences in individual and group
behavior.

The earliest research in the field of differential psychology began in the late nineteenth century with Francis Galton’s investigation of the effects of heredity on
individual intelligence and his pioneering work in intelligence testing, which was further advanced by James
McKeen Cattell and Alfred Binet. It was Binet who developed the first standardized intelligence test. Growth in
related areas such as genetics and developmental psychology, as well as advances in psychological testing, all
broadened the scope of the field considerably. While individual differences are often conceived of, at least pop-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

187

Differential psychology

emotional, and physical health, providing as complete a
context as possible in which to make a proper diagnosis.
The diagnostician evaluates the patient according to criteria for each axis to produce a comprehensive assessment
of the patient’s condition; the multiaxial system addresses
the complex nature of more mental disorders.

Disability

ularly, in terms of categories (“gifted,” “slow learner”),
they are actually measurable on a continuum which, for
most traits, follows the normal probability or “bell”
curve first derived from the study of heights of soldiers.
The majority of subjects cluster near the center with a
gradual decrease toward the extremes.
Some areas of research focused on today by psychologists working in differential psychology are the effect of heredity and environment on behavioral differences and differences in intelligence among individuals
and groups. Observations about group differences can be
misused and turn into stereotypes when mean characteristics are indiscriminately ascribed to all individuals in a
group, and when differences between groups are viewed
as unchangeable and solely hereditary.
Further Reading
Eysenck, Michael W. Individual Differences: Normal and Abnormal. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1994.

Disability
Any physical, mental, sensory, or psychological impairment or deficiency resulting in the lack, loss, or
substantial reduction of the ability to perform some
normal function.

In the United States, the term disability is legally defined in the Rehabilitation Act (PL 93-112; 29 U.S.C.
794) Amendments of 1974 and the Americans with Disabilities Act (PL 101-336; 42 U.S.C. 12101) of 1990 as a
physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one or more of the major life activities of an individual.
Disabilities may be caused by congenital, traumatic,
pathological, or other factors, and vary widely in severity. They may be temporary or permanent, correctable or
irreversible. Physical disabilities include blindness, deafness, deformity, muscular and nervous disorders, paralysis, and loss of limbs. Paralysis is frequently caused by
injuries to the spinal cord, with the extent of paralysis
depending on the portion of the spine that is injured.
Congenital disabilities include spina bifida, cystic fibrosis, and muscular dystrophy. Other causes of disabilities
include cerebral hemorrhage, arthritis and other bone
diseases, amputation, severe pulmonary or cardiac disease, nerve diseases, and the natural process of aging.
Mental impairments are of two types: mental illness and
mental retardation. Approximately 35 million people
in the United States are disabled.
Professionals including physicians, physical and occupational therapists, social workers, and psychologists
assist disabled persons in the rehabilitation process,
188

helping them function at the highest possible physical, vocational, and social levels. Specialists in rehabilitation
medicine, sometimes referred to as physiatrists, diagnose
patients and plan individual treatment programs for the
management of pain and disabilities resulting from musculoskeletal injuries. People with hearing or vision loss
require special education, including instruction in lip
reading, sign language, or Braille. Physical rehabilitation
for individuals with musculoskeletal disabilities includes
passive exercise of affected limbs and active exercise for
parts of the body that are not affected. Occupational training, including counseling, helps persons whose disabilities
make it necessary for them to find new jobs or careers.
Rehabilitation also involves the services of speech pathologists, recreational therapists, home planning consultants,
orthotists and prosthetists, driver educators, and dieticians.
Recent technological advances—especially those involving computer-aided devices—have aided immeasurably in mainstreaming the disabled into many areas of
society. These include voice-recognition aids for the paralyzed; optical character-recognition devices for the
blind; sip-and-puff air tubes that enable quadriplegics to
type and control wheelchair movements with their
mouths; and computerized electronic grids that translate
eye movements into speech. In addition to access, mobility for the disabled has become an area of concern. The
American Automobile Association (AAA) estimates that
there are 500,000 licensed drivers in the United States
with significant physical impairments and another 1.5
million with lesser disabilities. AAA auto clubs throughout the country are working to improve the mobility of
disabled drivers and travelers through improved driver
education for those with impairments and improved facilities for the handicapped traveler, including motorist
rest areas on the highway.
Public attitudes toward the disabled have changed.
Since the 1970s, advocates for the disabled have won
passage of numerous laws on the federal, state, and local
levels aimed at making education, employment, and public accommodation more accessible through the elimination of physical barriers to access, as well as affirmative
action in the hiring and professional advancement of disabled people. Whereas many people with disabilities
were formerly confined to their homes or to institutions,
the current trend is geared toward reintegrating disabled
persons into the community in ways that enable them the
greatest possible amount of independence in both their
living arrangements and their jobs. Wheelchair access at
building entrances, curbs, and public restrooms has been
greatly expanded and mandated by law. Braille signs are
standard in public areas such as elevators.
Two major pieces of federal legislation have protected the rights of the disabled: a 1975 law guaranteeing

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Dissociation/Dissociative disorders

CAUSES OF DISABILITIES IN CHILDREN UNDER AGE 17
Condition

Number (thousands)

Percent

Learning disability

1435

29.5%

Speech problems

634

13.1%

Mental retardation

331

6.8%

Asthma

311

6.4%

Mental or emotional problem or disorder

305

6.3%

Blindness or vision problem

144

3.0%

Cerebral palsy

129

2.7%

Epilepsy or seizure disorder

128

2.6%

Impairment deformity of back, side, foot, or leg

121

2.5%

Deafness or serious trouble hearing

116

2.4%

Tonsilitis or repeated ear infections

80

1.6%

Hay fever or other respiratory allergies

76

1.6%

Missing legs, feet, toes, arms, hands, or fingers

70

1.4%

Autism

48

1.0%

Drug or alcohol problem or disorder

48

1.0%

Head or spinal cord injury

45

0.9%

Heart trouble

44

0.9%

Impairment deformity of finger, hand, or arm

27

0.6%

Cancer

26

0.5%

Diabetes

14

0.3%

Other

653

13.4%

Total

4858

100%

Source: Centers for Disease Control, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

disabled children a right to public education in the least
restrictive setting possible and the 1990 Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA), which extends comprehensive
civil rights protection in employment and access to public areas. Title I of the ADA, which prohibits discrimination by private employers on the basis of disability, is intended to ensure that the same performance standards
and job requirements are applied to disabled persons as
to persons who are not. In cases where functional limitations may interfere with job performance, employers are
required to take any necessary steps to accommodate
reasonably the needs of a disabled person, including adjustments to the work environment or to the way in
which the job is customarily performed. The ADA also
contains provisions ensuring nondiscrimination in state
and local government services (Title II) and nondiscrimi-

nation in public accommodations and commercial facilities (Title III).
Further Reading
Davis, Lennard J. Enforcing Normalcy: Disability, Deafness,
and the Body. New York: Verso, 1995.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Dissociation/Dissociative
disorders
The feeling of being detached from oneself, of
being able to watch oneself as though from a distance; psychological disorders having at their core
long-term periods of such feelings when a specific
cause may not be identified.
189

Dissociative identity disorder

Dissociation, or the feeling of being detached from
the reality of one’s body, can be categorized into two
types: depersonalization and derealization. Depersonalization is highlighted by a sense of not knowing who you
are, or of questioning long-held beliefs about who you
are. In derealization, persons perceive reality in a grossly
distorted way. Psychologists have identified several
types of disorders based on these feelings. These include
depersonalization disorder, dissociative fugue, dissociative amnesia, dissociative trance disorder, and dissociative identity disorder (also known as multiple personality syndrome), among others.

ceremonies. Such people generally perform feats that
would normally cause injury or severe pain—such as
walking on hot coals—but because of their dissociated
mental state, they are not harmed. This is a curious subcategory in that the condition is not considered a “disorder” in many cultures of the world. Western psychiatrists
are divided as to whether this should really be considered a “disorder,” since the word has negative implications. It has been proposed, however, that future editions
of the DSM specify a diagnosis of trance and possession
disorder as one of several dissociative disorders.

Depersonalization disorder is a condition marked by
a persistent feeling of not being real. The DSM -IV describes its symptoms as “persistent or recurrent experiences of feeling detached from, and as if one is an outside
observer of, one’s mental processes or body (e.g., feeling
like one is in a dream).” While many people have experienced a similar feeling, persons actually suffering from
this disorder are so overwhelmed by these feelings that
they are unable to function normally in society. It is also
critical to point out that in order to be diagnosed as having this disorder, these feelings cannot be caused by some
specific drug or event. Depersonalization disorder, by itself, is a rare disorder, and, in fact, many of its symptoms
are also symptomatic of other more common disorders,
such as acute stress disorder and panic attacks.

Goleman, Daniel. “Those Who Stay Calm in Disasters May
Face Psychological Risk.” New York Times (17 April
1994): 12.
Mukerjee, Madhursee. “Hidden Scars: Sexual and Other Abuse
May Alter Brain Region.” Scientific American (October
1995): 14.

Dissociative fugue is a strange phenomena in which
persons will be stricken with a sudden memory loss that
prompts them to flee their familiar surroundings. These
flights are usually caused by some traumatic event. People suffering from this disorder will suddenly find themselves in a new surrounding, hundreds or even thousands
of miles from their homes with no memories of the
weeks, months, or even years that have elapsed since
their flight. Incidence of dissociative fugue rarely appear
until after adolescence and usually before the age of 50.
Once a person has fallen into the behavior, however, it is
more likely that it will recur.
Dissociative amnesia describes the condition of suddenly losing major chunks of memory. There are two types
of this disorder: generalized amnesia, in which a person
cannot remember anything about their lives, and localized
amnesia, a common disorder in which a person forgets
pieces of their identity but retains an overall understanding
of who they are. Dissociative amnesia is generally caused
by some traumatic event, such as a natural disaster, a violent crime, or war. In these instances, it is an adaptive
mechanism that allows a person to continue his or her life
without having to deal with an utterly horrific memory.
Dissociative trance disorder describes the trancestate that people experience in various kinds of religious
190

Further Reading

Dissociative identity disorder
Also referred to as multiple personality disorder, a
condition in which a person’s identity dissociates,
or fragments, creating additional, distinct identities
that exist independently of each other within the
same person.

Persons suffering from dissociative identity disorder (DID) adopt one or more distinct identities which
co-exist within one individual. Each personality is distinct from the other in specific ways. For instance, tone
of voice and mannerisms will be distinct, as well as posture, vocabulary, and everything else we normally think
of as marking a personality. There are cases in which a
person will have as many as 100 or more identities,
while some people only exhibit the presence of one or
two. In either case, the criteria for diagnosis are the
same. This disorder was, until the publication of DSMIV, referred to as multiple personality disorder. This
name was abandoned for a variety of reasons, one having to do with psychiatric explicitness (it was thought
that the name should reflect the dissociative aspect of
the disorder).
The DSM-IV lists four criteria for diagnosing someone with dissociative identity disorder. The first being
the presence of two or more distinct “identities or personality states.” At least two personalities must take control of the person’s identity regularly. The person must
exhibit aspects of amnesia—that is, he or she forgets
routine personal information. And, finally, the condition
must not have been caused by “direct physiological effects,” such as drug abuse or head trauma.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Statistically, sufferers of DID have an average of 15
identities. The disorder is far more common among females than males (as high as 9-to-1), and the usual age of
onset is in early childhood, generally by the age of four.
Once established, the disorder will last a lifetime if not
treated. New identities can accumulate over time as the
person faces new types of situations. For instance, as a
sufferer confronts sexuality in adolescence, an identity
may emerge that deals exclusively with this aspect of
life. There are no reliable figures as to the prevalence of
this disorder, although it has begun to be reported with
increased frequency over the last several years. People
with DID tend to have other severe disorders as well,
such as depression, substance abuse, borderline personality disorder and eating disorders, among others.
In nearly every case of DID, horrific instances of
physical or sexual child abuse—even torture—was present (one study of 100 DID patients found that 97 had
suffered child abuse). It is believed that young children,
faced with a routine of torture and neglect, create a fantasy world in order to escape the brutality. In this way,
DID is similar to post-traumatic stress disorder, and
recent thinking in psychiatry has suggested that the two
disorders may be linked; some are even beginning to
view DID as a severe subtype of post-traumatic stress
disorder.
Treatment of dissociative identity disorder is a long
and difficult process, and success (the complete integration of identity) is rare. A 1990 study found that of 20
patients studied, only five were successfully treated.
Current treatment method involves having DID patients
recall the memories of their childhoods. Because these
childhood memories are often subconscious, treatment
often includes hypnosis to help the patient remember.
There is a danger here, however, as sometimes the recovered memories are so traumatic for the patient that they
cause more harm.

TWO FAMOUS CASES
The stories of two women with multiple personality
disorders have been told both in books and films. A
woman with 22 personalities was recounted in 1957 in
a major motion picture staring Joanne Woodward and
in a book by Corbett Thigpen, both titled the Three
Faces of Eve. Twenty years later, in 1977, Caroline Sizemore, the 22nd personality to emerge in “Eve,” described her experiences in a book titled I’m Eve. Although the woman known as “Eve” developed a total of
22 personalities, only three could exist at any one
time—for a new one to emerge, an existing personality
would “die.”
The story of Sybil (a pseudonym) was published in
1973 by Flora Rheta Schreiber, who worked closely for
a decade with Sybil and her New York psychiatrist Dr.
Cornelia B. Wilbur. Sybil’s sixteen distinct personalities
emerged over a period of 40 years.
Both stories reveal fascinating insights—and raise
thought-provoking questions—about the unconscious
mind, the interrelationship between remembering and
forgetting, and the meaning of personality development. The separate and distinct personalities manifested
in these two cases feature unique physical traits and vocational interests. In the study of this disorder, scientists
have been able to monitor unique patterns of brainwave
activity for the unique multiple personalities.

There is considerable controversy about the nature,
and even the existence, of dissociative identity disorder.
One cause for the skepticism is the alarming increase in
reports of the disorder over the last several decades.
Eugene Levitt, a psychologist at the Indiana University
School of Medicine, noted in an article published in Insight on the News (1993) that “In 1952 there was no
listing for [DID] in the DSM, and there were only a
handful of cases in the country. In 1980, the disorder
[then known as multiple personality disorder] got its
official listing in the DSM, and suddenly thousands of
cases are springing up everywhere.” Another area of
contention is in the whole notion of suppressed memories, a crucial component in DID. Many experts dealing
with memory say that it is nearly impossible for anyone to remember things that happened before the age
three, the age when much of the abuse supposedly occurred to DID sufferers.
Regardless of the controversy, people diagnosed
with this disorder are clearly suffering from some profound disorder. As Helen Friedman, a clinical psychologist in St. Louis told Insight on the News, “When you see
it, it’s just not fake.”

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

191

Dissociative identity disorder

Persons suffering from DID usually have a main
personality that psychiatrists refer to as the “host.” This
is generally not the person’s original personality, but is
rather developed along the way. It is usually this personality that seeks psychiatric help. Psychiatrists refer to the
other personalities as “alters” and the phase of transition
between alters as the “switch.” The number of alters in
any given case can vary widely and can even vary across
gender. That is, men can have female alters and women
can have male alters. The physical changes that occur in
a switch between alters is one of the most baffling aspects of dissociative identity disorder. People assume
whole new physical postures and voices and vocabularies. One study conducted in 1986 found that in 37 percent of patients, alters even demonstrated different
handedness from the host.

Divergent thinking

Further Reading
Arbetter, Sandra. “Multiple Personality Disorder: Someone
Else Lives Inside of Me.” Current Health (2 November
1992): 17.
Mesic, Penelope. “Presence of Minds.” Chicago (September
1992): 100.
Sileo, Chi Chi. “Multiple Personalities: The Experts Are Split.”
Insight on the News (25 October 1993): 18.
Sizemore, Chris Costner. I’m Eve. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1977.
Sybil [videorecording].
Thigpen, Corbett H. The Three Faces of Eve. New York: Popular Library, 1957.
The Three Faces of Eve [videorecording]. Beverly Hills, CA:
FoxVideo, 1993. Produced and directed from his screenplay by Nunnally Johnson. Originally released as motion
picture in 1957.
“When the Body Remembers.” Psychology Today (April
1994): 9.

Divergent thinking
The ability to develop original and unique ideas
and to envision multiple solutions to a problem.

The concept of divergent thinking was developed in
the 1950s by psychologist J.P. Guilford, who saw it as a
major component of creativity and associated it with
four main characteristics. The characteristics were fluency (the ability to rapidly produce a large number of ideas
or solutions to a problem); flexibility (the capacity to
consider a variety of approaches to a problem simultaneously); originality (the tendency to produce ideas different from those of most other people); and elaboration
(the ability to think through the details of an idea and
carry it out). Guilford, whose research was oriented toward testing and measurement (psychometrics), believed that creative thinkers are at a disadvantage when
taking standard intelligence tests, which penalize divergent thinking and reward its opposite, convergent thinking—the ability to narrow all possible alternatives down
to a single solution (the type of thinking required by
multiple choice tests).
Over a number of years, the Aptitudes Research
Project (ARP) at the University of Southern California,
under Guilford’s leadership, devised an extensive sequence of tests to measure intellectual abilities, including creativity. Some of the ARP divergent thinking tests
have been widely adapted for use in placing students in
gifted programs and evaluating the success of such programs. They include a number of different assessment
techniques that measure the key characteristics of fluency, flexibility, and originality. Among the fluency tests
192

are word fluency, which asks test-takers to think of as
many words as they can that contain a given letter, and
ideational fluency, which involves naming things that belong to a specific category, such as fluids that will burn.
Other tests included listing all the possible jobs that
might be represented by a specific emblem and writing
titles for short stories after having been told their plots.
Another popular creativity test derived from the ARP
project is the consequences test, in which a person is
asked to list the possible consequences of an imaginary
event (“What would happen if everyone were immortal?”). In addition to these verbal tests, ARP also devised
tests to measure spatial aptitude, which include such
tasks as drawing objects using geometrical shapes.
Although creativity is associated with the highest
levels of achievement in many fields and presumably
valued by society, the educational system often penalizes
divergent thinkers. The typical standardized measure of
intelligence is the multiple-choice test, which is diametrically opposed to the divergent thinker’s problem-solving process. To a creative thinker, it may seem more productive to try finding reasons why all the choices on a
multiple-choice question could be correct than to select
the preferred answer. In addition, most classroom teaching is heavily biased toward the learning style of convergent thinkers, a fact that helps explain the dismal school
performance of such legendary geniuses as Albert Einstein and Thomas Alva Edison, who was considered retarded and expelled from school.
Further Reading
Amabile, Teresa M. Growing Up Creative: Nurturing a Lifetime of Creativity. New York: Crown Publishers, 1989.
Guilford, J.P. The Nature of Human Intelligence. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1967.

Divorce
The legal dissolution of a marriage.

The divorce rate in the United States began rising in
the 1960s and continued for more than two decades, with
a decline in the trend in the 1990s. In 1960 the divorce
rate per 1,000 population was 2.6. By 1980, the rate had
reached 5.2 and in 1990 dropped to 4.7. This decline
continued to 4.3 in 1997. Based on current societal
trends, researchers project that 40 to 50 percent of all
first marriages in the United States will end in divorce.
Possible factors for the high incidence of divorce include the enactment of “no-fault” divorce laws that make
it easier legally to get divorced; a decline in the number
of couples who stay together for religious reasons; the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

improved self-esteem. Most divorced people remarry
within three years, but many second marriages have not
been found to be successful.

Divorce is generally preceded by a breakdown in
communication between the partners. Research indicates
that marriages may also breakdown because of the manner in which couples argue and attempt to repair their relationship after quarreling. Other factors leading to divorce include alcoholism and drug abuse, domestic violence, extramarital affairs, and desertion. Divorce generally causes significant stress for all family members.
After the death of one’s spouse, divorce is considered the
single greatest stressor on the Holmes and Rahe Social
Readjustment Scale, which assigns point values to a variety of stress-producing life changes. Both partners
must make financial adjustments—an area of much bitterness during divorce proceedings. Social relationships
with friends and family often change, and the newly divorced person will likely face the challenges and insecurities of dating. Divorced parents have to adjust to raising
children on their own, adjust or adapt to noncustodial
parenthood. In adults, divorce may cause feelings of
guilt over one’s share of the responsibility for a failed
marriage, anger toward one’s spouse, and feelings of social, emotional, and financial insecurity. Also common to
divorce are feelings of anxiety, incompetence, depression, and loneliness.

The prevalence of divorce has led to a number of
prevention programs to train couples how to prevent divorce. Research indicates a small percentage of couples
considering divorce seek counseling, usually six years
after problems have developed in the marriage.

Children—who are involved in 70 percent of American divorces— may be even more severely affected than
their parents, although this also depends on such factors
as custody arrangements and parental attitudes. Divorce
often results in economic stress and disorganization for
the family. Divorce is thought to be hardest on young
children, who tend to blame themselves, fantasize that
their parents will get back together, and worry about
being abandoned. Sometimes the effects on younger
children do not become apparent until they reach adolescence. Children who are teenagers at the time of the divorce are strongly affected as well. In one study, subjects
who were in early adolescence when their parents divorced had trouble forming committed relationships ten
years later. The effects of parental divorce on children
have also been linked to phenomena as diverse as emotional and behavioral problems, school dropout rates,
crime rates, physical and sexual abuse and physical
health. However, the effects of divorce must be weighed
against the difficulty of continuing to live in a household
characterized by conflict and estrangement. Researchers
have found evidence that of the two alternatives, divorce
can be the less emotionally damaging one. After an initial period of turmoil, stability generally returns to the
lives of adults and children. Both may function more
competently than they did before the divorce and show

Further Reading
Fisher, Helen E. Anatomy of Love: The Natural History of
Monogamy, Adultery, and Divorce. New York: W. W. Norton, 1992.
Gottman, John. Why Marriages Succeed Or Fail New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1994.
McDonough, Hanna. Putting Children First: A Guide for Parents Breaking Up. Toronto: University of Toronto Press,
1999.
Wallerstein, Judith S. The Legacy of Divorce: A 25 Year Landmark Study. New York: Hyperion, 2000.

DNA
See Deoxyribonucleic acid

Double-blind study
See Experimental design

Down syndrome
A hereditary mental disorder present at birth resulting from an abnormality in the number of chromosomes; also known Trisomy 21.

Down syndrome was named after John Langdon
Haydon Down, a British physician and advocate of education for the mentally retarded, who first described it in
1866. In 1959, the French pediatrician Jerome Lejeune
discovered that the disorder is caused by a chromosomal
abnormality. Ninety-five percent of individuals with
Down syndrome have Trisomy 21, an extra chromosome
in the 21st pair (altogether, they have 47 chromosomes
instead of the normal 46); four percent have translocation, a chromosomal abnormality; and one percent have
mosaicism. Down syndrome is characterized primarily
by varying degrees of mental and motor retardation.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

193

Down syndrome

increased financial independence of women; conflicts resulting from the growing number of dual-career marriages; and a greater social acceptance of divorce.

Down syndrome

Recent research has led to the conclusion that Down
children are capable of expressing complex feelings, of
developing richer personalities, and of mastering higher
degrees of learning using adaptive strategies (such as
computer-aided learning to teach reading and writing).
One developmental program that began with Down children as young as 30 months old and stressed positive
parent-child communication eventually enabled the children to read at a second-grade level. The theory is that
early stimulation helps to develop connections in the
brain that might otherwise not have developed.

Genetic map of a person with Down syndrom. Note three
copies of chromosome 21. (Phototake/ NYC. Reproduced by
permission.)

Most people with the disorder are retarded. Individuals
with Down syndrome have I.Q.s ranging from 20 to
more than 90, with the mean being 49. They are also
prone to possible heart defects, poor vision and hearing,
cataracts, and a low resistance to respiratory infections.
Until the discovery of antibiotics, most Down syndrome
children died of pneumonia before reaching adulthood.
People with Down syndrome are 20 times more likely
than the general population to develop leukemia and a
neurological condition similar to Alzheimer’s disease.
Individuals with Down syndrome have a distinctive
physical appearance characterized by almond-shaped
eyes (on which the condition’s former alternate name—
mongolism—was based); a short, stocky build; a flat
nose and large, protruding tongue (which makes normal
speech difficult); a small skull flattened in the back; a
short neck with extra skin; and small hands with short
fingers. Other features include a fold of skin on the inner
side of the eye; speckling at the edge of the iris; and a
small amount of facial and body hair. Muscle tone is
often poor, and newborns are prone to hypotonia, or
“floppiness.” People with Down syndrome are widely
recognized to have docile temperaments; and are generally cheerful, cooperative, affectionate, and relaxed, although there are no scientific studies to confirm this.
Their motor, speech, and sexual development is delayed,
and their cognitive development may not peak until the
age of 30 or 40. In infancy, speech development is delayed by about seven months.
194

Although most people with Down syndrome were
institutionalized until the 1970s, those with only moderate retardation are capable of achieving some degree of
self-sufficiency. Today, with changed social attitudes and
expanded educational opportunities, many lead productive, fulfilling lives. In less than a century, the expected
lifespan of a person with Down syndrome has increased
from nine years of age in 1910 to 19 or 20 after the discovery of antibiotics to age 55 today, due to recent advancements in clinical treatment.
More than 350,000 people in the United States have
Down syndrome; one baby is born with Down syndrome
for every 800 to 1,000 births in the U.S. Down syndrome
babies are found in every ethnic group and socioeconomic
class. About 5,000 babies are born yearly in the United
States with Down syndrome. Twenty to 25 percent of children conceived with Down syndrome survive beyond
birth. Women over age 35 have a one in 400 chance of
conceiving a child with Down syndrome. For women age
40, the incidence becomes one in 110. For mothers age 45,
the incidence increases to one child in every 35. Under age
30, women give birth to Down syndrome babies at a rate of
one for every 1,500 babies born. However, women under
age 35 actually bear 80 percent of Down infants, and recent studies suggest that the father’s age may play a role as
well. Prenatal detection of Down syndrome is possible
through amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling and
is recommended for pregnant women over the age of 35.
See also Mental retardation
Further Reading
Cicchetti, D. & Beeghly, M. (Eds.) Children with Down Syndrome: A Developmental Perspective. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Cunningham, C. Understanding Down Syndrome: An Introduction for Parents. Cambridge, MA: Brookline Books, 1996.

Further Information
National Down Syndrome Congress. 1800 Dempster Street,
Park Ridge, Illinois 60068-1146, (708) 823–7550, (800)
232–NDSC.
National Down Syndrome Society. 666 Broadway, New York,
New York 10012, (212) 460–9330, (800) 221–4602.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

A test used to measure nonverbal intelligence or to
screen for emotional or behavior disorders.

Based on children’s drawings of human figures, this
test can be used with two different scoring systems for
different purposes. One measures nonverbal intelligence
while the other screens for emotional or behavioral disorders. During the testing session, which can be completed in 15 minutes, the child is asked to draw three figures—a man, a woman, and him- or herself. To evaluate
intelligence, the test administrator uses the Draw-a-Person: QSS (Quantitative Scoring System). This system
analyzes fourteen different aspects of the drawings, such
as specific body parts and clothing, for various criteria,
including presence or absence, detail, and proportion. In
all, there are 64 scoring items for each drawing. A separate standard score is recorded for each drawing, and a
total score for all three. The use of a nonverbal, nonthreatening task to evaluate intelligence is intended to
eliminate possible sources of bias by reducing variables
like primary language, verbal skills, communication disabilities, and sensitivity to working under pressure.
However, test results can be influenced by previous
drawing experience, a factor that may account for the
tendency of middle-class children to score higher on this
test than lower-class children, who often have fewer opportunities to draw. To assess the test-taker for emotional
problems, the administrator uses the Draw-a-Person:
SPED (Screening Procedure for Emotional Disturbance)
to score the drawings. This system is composed of two
types of criteria. For the first type, eight dimensions of
each drawing are evaluated against norms for the child’s
age group. For the second type, 47 different items are
considered for each drawing.

In order to understand how dreaming occurs, brain
waves during sleep have been measured by an electroencephalograph (EEG). Normally large and slow during
sleep, these waves become smaller and faster during periods of sleep accompanied by rapid eye movements
(called REM sleep), and it is during these period when
dreams occur. During a normal eight-hour period of sleep,
an average adult will dream three to five dreams lasting
ten to thirty minutes each for a total of 100 minutes.

The sequence of imagery, thoughts, and emotions
that pass through the mind during sleep.

Dreams—which Sigmund Freud called “the royal
road to the unconscious”—have provided psychologists
and psychotherapists with abundant information about
the structure, dynamics, and development of the human
personality. Several theories attempt to explain why we
dream. The oldest and most well-known is Freud’s psychoanalytic theory, elucidated in The Interpretation of
Dreams (1900), in which he suggested that dreams are
disguised symbols of repressed desires and therefore
offer us direct insight into the unconscious. According
to Freud, the manifest content of dreams, such as daily
events and memories, serve to disguise their latent content or unconscious wishes through a process he called
dream-work, consisting of four operations. Condensation refers to the condensing of separate thoughts into a
single image in order to fit the latent content into the
brief framework of a dream. Displacement serves to disguise the latent content by creating confusion between
important and insignificant elements of the dream. Symbolization serves as a further effort to evade the “censor”
of repressed desires by symbolizing certain objects with
other objects, as in the case of phallic symbols. Secondary revision enables the dreamer to make the dream
more coherent by additions that fill it in more intelligibly
while he or she is recalling it.

Dreams defy the laws of physics, the principles of
logic, and personal morality, and may reflect fears, frustrations, and personal desires. Often occurring in storyform with the dreamer as participant or observer, dreams
usually involve several characters, motion, and may include sensations of taste, smell, hearing, or pain. The
content of dreams clearly reflects daytime activities, even
though these may be distorted to various degrees. While

Although Carl Jung’s system of analysis differed
greatly from that of Freud, the Swiss psychologist
agreed with Freud’s basic view of dreams as compensating for repressed psychic elements. According to Jung’s
theory, significant dreams (those that involve the collective unconscious) are attempts to reveal an image, or archetype, that is not sufficiently “individuated” in the
subject’s personality. Another Swiss analyst, Medard
Boss, offered yet another perspective on dreams as part

See also Intelligence

Dreams

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

195

Dreams

Draw-a-person test

some people report dreaming only in black and white,
others dream in color. “Lucid dreaming,” in which the
sleeper is actually aware of dreaming while the dream is
taking place, is not uncommon. Research has indicated
that everyone dreams during every night of normal sleep.
Many people do not remember their dreams, however,
and most people recall only the last dream prior to awakening. The memory shut-down theory suggests that
memory may be one of the brain’s functions which rests
during dreaming, hence we forget our dreams.

Drive reduction theory

of his system of “existential analysis.” Under Boss’s system, the significance of dreams lay close to their surface
details rather than corresponding to an intricate symbolic
pattern. Thus, for example, dreams set in a narrow, constricted room indicated that this was how the dreamer
viewed his or her existence. Existential analysis was
based on the feelings of the dreamer, the contents of the
dream, and his or her response to them.
In contrast with the methods of these early dream
analysts, modern researchers gather data from subjects in
a sleep laboratory, a mode of investigation furthered in
the 1950s. Calvin Hall, a pioneer in the content analysis
of dreams, posits that dreams are meant to reveal rather
than to conceal. Hall and his associates gathered dreams
from a large and varied sampling of subjects and analyzed them for the following content categories: 1)
human characters classified by sex, age, family members, friends and acquaintances, and strangers; 2) animals; 3) types of interactions among characters, such as
aggressive or friendly; 4) positive and negative events; 5)
success and failure; 6) indoor and outdoor settings; 7)
objects; and 8) emotions. Other investigators have devised their own systems of content analysis, such as the
one outlined by David Foulkes in A Grammar of
Dreams. The dreams of children have also been extensively assessed through laboratory testing and shown to
be linked to their cognitive development. Content
analysis has also yielded longitudinal information about
individuals, including the observations that an adult’s
dreams remain strikingly similar over time and are
strongly linked to the preoccupations of waking life, a
phenomenon known as the continuity principle.
Dream analysis may occur in certain therapies. In
the 1970s, writers and psychologists, such as Ann Faraday, helped to take dream analysis out of the therapy
room and popularize it by offering techniques anyone
could use to analyze his or her own dreams. Widely recommended techniques include keeping paper and pen by
the bed to write dreams down upon waking (even in the
middle of the night), keeping a dream diary to recognize
recurring themes, and making associations with the imagery in the dream to decode its personal meaning. Analysts, such as Robert Johnson, maintain that dreams contain the dreamer’s thoughts or feelings not yet expressed
or made conscious. Johnson recommends making associations to the dream to unlock ways the dream mirrors
inner tensions or dynamics of the dreamer’s emotional
life. The dreamer uses the associations and dynamics
linked to daily life to interpret or give meaning to the
dream. Some psychologists recommend cultivating lucid
dreaming where the dreamer is aware in the dream that
he or she is dreaming and then can direct the events of
dreams and the manner in which they unfold.
196

Not all dreams reflect daily life. Reports indicate
dreams have foretold events upcoming in the dreamer’s
life, including death. One study reports that 70 percent of
women successfully predicted the sex of their unborn
child based upon dreams.
Some scientists have attempted to discount the significance of dreams entirely. The activation-synthesis hypothesis created by J. Alan Hobson and Robert W. McCarley in 1977 holds that dreaming is a simple and
unimportant by-product of random stimulation of brain
cells activated during REM sleep. Another dream theory,
the mental housecleaning hypothesis, suggests that we
dream to rid our brains of useless, bizarre, or redundant
information. A current synthesis of this theory sees
dreaming as analogous to a computer’s process of program inspection in which sleep is similar to “down” time
and the dream becomes a moment of “on-line” time, a
glimpse into a program being run at that moment.
See also Rapid eye movement (REM)
Further Reading
Gardner, Richard A. Dream Analysis in Psychotherapy.
Cresskill, N.J.: Creative Therapeutics, 1996.
Hall, Kirsten. Last Night I Danced With A Stranger. New York:
Black Do & Leventhal Publishers, 2000.

Drive reduction theory
A popular theory of the 1940s and 1950s that attributed behavior to the desire to reduce tension
produced by primary (biological) or secondary (acquired) drives.

Many psychologists believed that all motivation depended upon the pleasure experienced when basic needs
are met. A person who is hungry, for instance, eats in
order to reduce the tension that hunger produces. All
human behavior could be attributed to the pleasure
gained when these drive-induced tensions were reduced.
Drive reduction theory lost favor over the years because it failed to explain human actions that produced,
rather than reduced, tension. Many people enjoy riding
roller coasters or skydiving, for instance, despite the fact
that such activity may cause fear and anxiety. Similarly,
drive theory could not adequately explain sexual behavior in humans or animals. For example, experiments
showed that rats persisted in seeking sexual gratification
even when their biological urges to mate were interrupted and thus tension was not reduced.
More modern motivational theory includes the principal of optimal arousal, that is, individuals act to main-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

benzodiazepines have remained popular for the treatment of patients suffering from anxiety. A new member
of this class of drug, Xanax, has also been widely used in
the treatment of panic disorders and agoraphobia.

Further Reading

Narcotics, such as opiates which include heroin and
its derivatives, are drugs with sedative properties; they
are addictive and produce tolerance. They have a complex combination of effects, causing both drowsiness and
euphoria, and are also pain-killers. Eaten, smoked, inhaled, or injected intravenously, heroin impairs the respiratory system, induces changes in the heart and blood
vessels, constipation, and loss of appetite. It is derived
from morphine, but is several times more powerful. An
overdose of heroin can result in death.

Atkinson, Rita L.; Richard C. Atkinson; Edward E. Smith; and
Ernest R. Hilgard. Introduction to Psychology. 9th ed. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. 12th ed. Glenview,
IL: Scott, Foresman, 1988.

Drugs/Drug abuse
Any chemical substance that alters normal biological processes.

Psychoactive drugs alter behavior, thought, or
emotions by changing biochemical reactions in the nervous system. They can be addictive (habit-forming), and
they can be legal or illegal.
Drug abuse is the self-administration of drugs in
ways that depart from medical or social norms, and it
can lead to psychological or physical dependence. Physical dependence, or addiction, which can occur together
with psychological dependence, is characterized by
withdrawal symptoms and can involve increased tolerance for the drug. The causes of substance abuse are
multiple: some people are high-risk for dependence due
to genetic or physiological reasons; others become dependent on drugs to cope with emotional or social problems, or physical pain.
Depressants reduce activity of the central nervous
system. The most common depressive drug is alcohol,
which calms, induces sleep, decreases inhibitions and
fears, and slows reflexes. With continued use, the nervous system accommodates alcohol, requiring increasing
amounts to achieve the alcoholic state, and produces
withdrawal symptoms. Sedatives are another major category of depressants, notably barbiturates, such as Seconal and Nembutal. Overdoses can be fatal, and withdrawal symptoms are among the most severe for any
drug. Anxiolytics (traditionally referred to as tranquilizers) are also sedatives and include the benzodiazepines
(Librium, Valium) and meprobamate (Miltown). Many
users of these drugs become both psychologically and
physically dependent, and their withdrawal symptoms
resemble those of barbiturate takers. Taken in combination with alcohol, anxiolytics can be fatal. Anxiolytics
are still used in the clinical treatment of anxiety and are
the most widely prescribed and used legal drugs. Because they pose little danger of death from overdose, the

Psychedelics, or hallucinogens, such as marijuana,
are consciousness-altering drugs that affect moods,
thought, memory, and perception. They can produce
distortion of body image, loss of identity, and hallucinations. Usage can produce impaired performance on intellectual and psychomotor tasks, psychoses, and psychological dependence. LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) is
one of the most powerful psychedelic drugs. It can cause
bizarre hallucinations, its effects are highly unpredictable, and some users suffer long-term side effects.
While low doses of marijuana are considered relaxing
and relieve anxiety with minimal health risks, long-term
usage in larger amounts may cause major health hazards
such as asthma and other respiratory disorders, suppression of the immune system, and heart problems.
Psychostimulants, such as amphetamines and cocaine, are drugs that in moderate or low doses increase
mental and behavioral activity. They stimulate alertness,
reduce fatigue, increase excitability, elevate moods, and
depress appetites. Benzedrine, Dexedrine, Methedrine,
(also called “uppers” or “speed”), raise the heart rate and
blood pressure, constrict blood pressure, shrink mucous
membranes (thus their use as decongestants), and reduce
appetite. Many people abuse amphetamines in order to
lose weight, remain productive and alert, or to “get
high.” The symptoms of severe amphetamine abuse can
resemble those of paranoid schizophrenia. Cocaine and
its derivative, “crack,” are both highly addictive and take
effect more rapidly than amphetamines. Overdoses, especially of crack, can be fatal, and small doses may induce cardiac arrest or stroke. Cocaine addiction is especially difficult to break.
Two popular stimulants that most people do not consider “drugs” are caffeine and nicotine. Caffeine is found
in coffee, tea, chocolate, and many soft drinks. It decreases drowsiness and speeds up thought, but at high doses
can produce anxiety and induce tremors. Caffeine is addictive; its withdrawal symptoms include headaches, fa-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

197

Drugs/Drug abuse

tain an appropriate—rather than a minimal—level of
stimulation and arousal. Optimal levels vary from person
to person, which explains why some people drive race
cars and others prefer an evening at the symphony.

Drugs/Drug abuse

COCAINE
A crystalline alkaloid derived from the leaves of the
South American coca plant, Erythorxylun. Medically, cocaine can be used as a local aesthetic because it interrupts the conduction of the nerve impulses, particularly
in the mucous membranes of the eyes, nose and throat.
Illegally, cocaine is widely abused. As powered cocaine
hydrochloride, it is usually diluted with some other substance, such as aspirin, cornstarch lactose, or talc, and
sucked into the nostrils or dissolved in water and injected
intravenously. When cocaine is sniffed, it travels from the
nasal tissue to the bloodstream and then to the brain, affecting the user within two or three minutes, and if injected, within 15 seconds. Its physiological effects include
dilated pupils; elevated heart rate, blood pressure, and
body temperature; rapid breathing; and an increased appetite. The drug may also augment norepinephrine and
dopamine activity—an effect similar to the of amphetamines—and stimulate the cortex of the brain. Cocaine
produces a quick but short “rush,” characterized by temporary feelings of euphoria, self-confidence, well-being,
and optimism, and hallucinations can also be present.
The drug’s pleasant effects peak in about 20 to 40 minutes and subside after about a hour, followed by a depression that induces a craving for the drug.
Cocaine can also be converted into a solid from by
separating it from its hydrochloride base. This from,
commonly known as “crack” cocaine, produces a high
that is particularly fast and intense. It is extremely addictive, inducing constant cravings that can cost up to
$500 a day to satisfy. Crack cocaine is usually smoked
in a pipe or mixed with tobacco in a cigarette. As it has
become cheaper to produce, its cost has dropped, and

now crack cocaine costs less than one-fifth as much as
regular cocaine.
Cocaine is a potent drug, and habituation and dependence may occur very quickly with its abuse. Cocaine users first become psychologically addicted to the
drug, as the artificially induced optimism and confidence
they feel helps them to cope with daily stresses. Soon, the
cocaine user becomes physically addicted as well and
often develops a secondary addiction to a depressant,
such as alcohol or heroin, to help him or her “come
down” from the drug’s effects and to induce sleep. When
taken internally in any form, cocaine has a highly toxic
effect on the central nervous system. Frequent and/or
long-term abuse of cocaine may cause overactivity, loss
of appetite, nausea, heart problems, seizures, comas,
strokes, and permanent brain damage. It can also precipitate delusional psychotic disorders.
Withdrawal from habitual cocaine abuse is characterized by severe physical and emotional discomfort and
may last several weeks. Symptoms include muscle pains
and spasms, and decreased energy levels and mental
functioning. It is very difficult to withdraw from the drug
without professional help. An overdose of cocaine stimulate the spinal cord, and may result in convulsions, depression of the entire nervous system, respiratory failure,
and death. In the past 50 years, the incidence of cocaine
among Americans has risen dramatically (although there
has been a slight decrease since the mid-1980s). A 1988
survey found that one in ten people had used the drug
with the number rising to one in four for adults between
the ages of 18 and 25.

tigue, craving, and shakiness. They appear within 12 to
24 hours from the last intake, peak at around 48 hours,
and continue for a week. Nicotine, the psychostimulant in
tobacco, has a powerful effect on the autonomic nervous
system. While some claim that nicotine addiction is more
psychological than physical, it is associated with definite
withdrawal symptoms, including cravings, restlessness,
irritability, and weight gain. It can cause lung cancer,
heart attack, respiratory disorders, and stroke. When used
by pregnant women, it can harm their unborn children in
a number of ways.

chlorpromazine, Thorazine, and Haldol, are the most
commonly used antipsychotic drug.

Certain classes of psychoactive drugs are used clinically to treat depression, mania, anxiety, and schizophrenia. Therapy for severe mental disorders was transformed in the 1950s with the discovery of neuroleptics
(antipsychotics), which reduced psychotic symptoms, including delusions, paranoid suspicions, confusion, incoherence, and hallucinations. Phenothiazines, notably

Antidepressants, a second class of therapeutic
drugs, reduce symptoms of depression (depressed mood,
fatigue, appetite loss, sleep disorders) in a majority of
users. There are several types of antidepressants, including monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAO-I), which can
also relieve panic attacks; tricyclic antidepressants,
which seem to be more effective for many patients; and a

198

Another drug, clozapine (Clozaril), has effects similar to those of phenothiazines but without the long-term
side effect of movement disorders that afflicts at least 25
percent of phenothiazine users. However, about two percent of clozapine users are at risk for a different problem—agranulucytosis, a fatal blood disorder, and all patients who take the drug must be tested regularly for this
side effect.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Alcohol dependence and abuse

When drug therapy was first introduced, many people, including some mental health professionals, considered medication a simple solution to controlling undesirable behaviors. Research has shown, however, that drug
therapy is most effective when used in conjunction with
traditional therapy. In the early history of drug therapy,
patients in psychiatric hospitals were often medicated,
sometimes without receiving any other sort of treatment.
Today, it is more common for patients to participate in a
range of activities and therapies, such as group therapy
and music therapy, while they are on medication. Indeed, sometimes medication makes it possible for some
patients to participate in the therapeutic process at all.

Drug therapy
Medications administered to help people suffering
from psychological illnesses.

DSM-IV
Because research has shown that many psychiatric illnesses are biological in origin, drug therapy is often the
prescribed treatment. Drug therapy is used to treat a variety
of psychological disorders, including attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), major depression, schizophrenia, Tourette’s syndrome, anxiety disorders, autism,
panic attacks, and obsessive-compulsive disorder, among
many others. Drug therapy can be very effective when the
patient shows a high level of compliance to the recommended course of treatment. The effectiveness of various
medications has enabled many people to lead a full and active life, or at a higher level of functioning than would otherwise be possible without drug therapy.
Along with the benefits derived from drug therapy,
however, medications can also evoke side effects such as
irritability, agitation, nausea, and headaches. The stimulants used to control ADHD, for example, can suppress
growth, particularly weight gain. Schizophrenia is treated with antipsychotic agents such as chlorpromazine,
thioridazine, haloperidol, and thiothlxene. Long-term
use can produce tardive dyskinesia, an involuntary
tongue and mouth movement disorder, stiffness, and
tremors. Clomipramime, an antidepressant effective in
the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder, can produce dry mouth, blurred vision, constipation, rapid
heartbeat, and urinary retention. Muscle stiffness often
accompanies the drug haloperidol when it is taken for
Tourette’s syndrome. Antidepressants such as nortriptyline (brand name Pamelor), imipramine (Tofranil), desipramine (Norpramin), fluoxetine (Prozac), sertraline
(Zoloft), and paroxetine (Paxil) all carry a small risk of
triggering a manic or hypomanic episode. When a person
considers taking medication for a psychological condition, it is important to be aware of the possible side effects, as well as knowing the proper dosage, and any
harmful drug interactions.

See Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders

Dysfunctional family
A family whose interrelationships serve to detract
from, rather than promote, the emotional and physical health and well-being of its members.

Although this term is used casually in popular culture, health care professionals define dysfunctional family as one where the relationships among family members are not conducive to emotional and physical health.
Sexual or physical abuse, alcohol and drug addictions,
delinquency and behavior problems, eating disorders,
and extreme aggression are some conditions commonly
associated with dysfunctional family relationships.
The concept of the dysfunctional family is based on
a systems approach to mental health diagnosis and
treatment, where the individual’s symptoms are seen in
the context of relationships with other individuals and
groups, rather than as problems unique to the client.
There is no strict definition of a “dysfunctional family,”
and especially in popular usage the term tends to be a
catchall for many different relational disorders that take
place within the family system and its subsystems (parents, children). Mental health care providers and institutions increasingly recognize family and couples therapy
as effective methods of treating diverse mental health
disorders, especially where children are involved.
Some of the characteristics of dysfunctional family
systems are as follows:

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

199

Dysfunctional family

“second generation” of serotonin-related antidepressants.
The best-known drug of this type, Prozac (fluoxetine),
has become the most widely prescribed antidepressant in
the United States due to its combination of effectiveness
and lack of side effects. It also helps sufferers from obsessive-compulsive disorder. The drug lithium is used
to relieve episodes of both mania and depression in patients with bipolar disorder.

Dyslexia

• Blaming; failure to take responsibility for personal actions and feelings; and invalidation of other family
members’ feelings.
• Boundaries between family members that are either too
loose or too rigid. For example, the parent may depend
excessively on the child for emotional support (loose
boundaries) or prevent the child from developing autonomy by making all the decisions for the child (rigid
boundaries).
• Boundaries between the family as a whole and the outside world may also be too loose or too rigid.
• A tendency for family members to enact set roles—
caregiver, hero, scapegoat, saint, bad girl or boy, little
prince or princess—that serve to restrict feelings, experience, and self-expression.
• A tendency to have an “identified patient”—one family
member who is recognized as mentally unhealthy, who
may or may not be in treatment, but whose symptoms
are a sign of the inner family conflict. Often the identified patient’s problems function to disguise the larger
family issues. For example, a child may be regarded as
a bully and a troublemaker in school and labeled a
“problem child,” when he may in fact be expressing
conflicts and problems, such as abuse from home, by
acting out and being “bad.”
Family therapists, like other therapists, take many
different treatment approaches—psychodynamic, behavioral, cognitive, or a combination of these therapies.
They may talk to members individually, together, and in
subgroups. They may ask family members to reenact situations, or to do “homework” by modifying elements of
their behavior and responses. As with individual therapy,
one of the goals of family counseling is to reframe problems so that family members can see specific events and
behaviors more clearly in a broader systems perspective.
Further Reading
Annunziata, Jane, and Phyllis Jacobson-Kram. Solving Your Problems Together: Family Therapy for the Whole Family. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 1994.
Kaslow, Florence W., ed. Handbook of Relational Diagnosis
and Dysfunctional Family Patterns. New York: John
Wiley, 1996.
Minuchin, Salvador, and H. Charles Fishman. Family Therapy
Techniques. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1981.

Dyslexia
A reading disability that is not caused by an identifiable physical problem (such as brain damage, visual or auditory problems).
200

Dyslexia is a specific learning disability characterized by a significant disparity between an individual’s
general intelligence and his or her language skills, usually reflected in school performance.
Estimates of people with dyslexia range from 2% to
the National Institutes of Health figure of 15% of the
U.S. population. It is a complicated disorder with no
identifiable cause or cure, yet it is highly responsive to
treatment in the form of special instruction. The most
obvious symptoms of the dyslexic show up in reading
and writing, but listening, speaking, and general organizational skills are also affected. The dyslexic may have
trouble transferring information across modalities, for
example from verbal to written forms. The dyslexic’s
characteristic reversal of letters, confusion between similar letters such as “b” and “d,” omission of words when
reading aloud, trouble sounding out words, and difficulty
following written instructions were first thought to be the
result of vision and perceptual problems—i.e., a failure
of taking in the stimulus. Only a small percentage of
dyslexics have vision disorders, however, and it is now
generally agreed by physicians, researchers, and educators that dyslexia is primarily a language disorder.
Whereas the non-dyslexic intuitively learns phonic
(sound) rules while learning to read, the dyslexic needs
specific, methodical drill and practice to learn the visualauditory associations necessary for reading comprehension and written expression.
Originally it was thought that dyslexia affected more
males than females (in a ratio of 5:1), but later studies
found males to be only slightly more likely than females
to be dyslexic. Figures for diagnosed child dyslexics are
skewed because for various reasons boys tend to be referred more frequently for special education. Diagnosis
is complicated by the fact that anywhere from 20% to
55% of dyslexics also suffer from attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a behavioral disorder
which can aggravate reading problems. There are many
different theories about the causes and classifications of
different types of dyslexia, but few hard conclusions. It
is definitely familial, and about 40% of boys and 20% of
girls with a dyslexic parent show the disorder. Several
genetic studies have found gene linkages which demonstrate heterogeneous (multiple methods of) transmission.
Dyslexics have average or above average intelligence,
and it is speculated that they have heightened visual-spatial and motor awareness. Thomas Edison, Albert Einstein, Woodrow Wilson, General George Patton, and Auguste Rodin are thought to have been dyslexic.
There are many treatment approaches available to
the public, ranging from visual stimulation to diets to enhancement of regular language education. However, it is
generally agreed that specialized education is the only

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Dyslexia
Typical writings of a dyslexic. (Will & Deni McIntyre/Science Source, National Audubon Society Collection/ Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced with permission.)

successful remedy, and the American Academy of Ophthalmology, the American Academy of Pediatrics, and
the American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology
and Strabismus have issued a policy statement warning
against visual treatments and recommending a cross-disciplinary educational approach. In fact the first researcher to identify and study dyslexia, Samuel Torrey
Orton, developed the core principles of such an approach
in the 1920s. The work of three of his followers—teachers Bessie Stillman, Anna Gillingham, and Beth Slingerland—underlies many of the programs in wide use today
such as project READ, the Wilson Reading System, and
programs based on the Herman method. These and other
successful programs have three characteristics in common. They are:
(1) Sound/symbol based. They break words down
into their smallest visual components: letters and the
sounds associated with them.
(2) Multisensory. They attempt to form and
strengthen mental associations among visual, auditory,
and kinesthetic channels of stimulation. The dyslexic simultaneously sees, feels, and says the sound-symbol association; for example, a student may trace the letter or

letter combination with his finger while pronouncing a
word out loud.
(3) Highly structured. Remediation begins at the
level of the single letter-sound, works up to digraphs,
then syllables, then into words and sentences in a very
systematic fashion. Repetitive drill and practice serve to
form necessary sound-symbol associations.
If caught early, especially before the third grade,
dyslexia is highly treatable through special education.
Further Reading
Bowler, Rosemary F., ed. Annals of Dyslexia. Baltimore, MD:
The Orton Dyslexia Society, 1983.
Galaburda, A., ed. Dyslexia and Development: Neurobiological
Aspects of Extraordinary Brains. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1993.
Miles. T.R. Dyslexia. Philadelphia: Open University Press,
1990.
Lytle, Vicky. “Edison, Rockefeller, Rodin, and the Reading
Problem: Detecting Dyslexia in Students.” NEA Today 4,
(October 1985): 10-11.
Rooney, Karen. “Dyslexia Revisited: History, Educational Philosophy, and Clinical Assessment Applications.” Intervention in School and Clinic 31, no. 1, (1995): 6-15.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

201

Dyslexia

Rumsey, Judith M. “The Biology of Developmental Dyslexia:
Grand Rounds at the Clinical Center of the National Institutes of Health.” JAMA 19, no. 7, (1992): 912-16.

Foundation for Children with Learning Disabilities. 99 Park
Avenue, New York, NY 10016.

Further Information

Orton Dyslexia Society. 8600 LaSalle Road, Chester Building,
Suite 382, Baltimore, MD 21286-2044, (410) 296–0232,
information line: (800) ABC-D123.

Council for Learning Disabilities. P.O. Box 40303, Overland
Park, KS 66204.

202

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

E
Eating disorders
Eating disorders are characterized by an obsessive
preoccupation with food and/or body weight.

Eating disorders are rooted in complex emotional issues that center on self-esteem and pervasive societal
messages that equate thinness with happiness. Eating
disorders usually surface in adolescence, and more than
90% of sufferers are female, although the incidence
among males appears to be growing. Because eating disorders are neither purely physical nor purely psychological, effective treatment must include both medical management and psychotherapy. The earlier a diagnosis is
made and treatment is started, the better the chances of a
successful outcome.
The two most common types of eating disorders are
anorexia nervosa and bulimia, which are covered separately in this book.
Gail B. Slap, M.D.
Further Reading
Maloney, Michael and Rachel Kranz. Straight Talk About Eating Disorders. New York: Facts on File, 1991.

Further Information
National Association of Anorexia Nervosa and Associated Disorders (ANAD). P.O. Box 7, Highland Park, IL 60035,
(847) 831–3438.
National Eating Disorders Organization. 6655 Yale Avenue,
Tulsa, OK 74136, (918) 481–4044.

Hermann Ebbinghaus
1850-1909
German psychologist whose work resulted in the
development of scientifically reliable experimental
methods for the quantitative measurement of rote
learning and memory.

Hermann Ebbinghaus (Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with
permission.)

Born in Germany, Hermann Ebbinghaus received
his formal education at the universities of Halle, Berlin,
and Bonn, where he earned degrees in philosophy and
history. After obtaining his philosophy degree in 1873,
Ebbinghaus served in the Franco-Prussian War. For the
next seven years following the war, he tutored and studied independently in Berlin, France, and England. In the
late 1870s, Ebbinghaus became interested in the workings of human memory. In spite of Wilhelm Wundt’s
assertion in his newly published Physiological Psychology that memory could not be studied experimentally,
Ebbinghaus decided to attempt such a study, applying to
this new field the same sort of mathematical treatment

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

203

John C. Eccles

that Gustav Fechner (1801-1887) had described in Elements of Psychophysics (1860) in connection with his
study of sensation and perception.
Using himself as both sole experimenter and subject,
Ebbinghaus embarked on an arduous process that involved
repeatedly testing his memorization of nonsense words devised to eliminate variables caused by prior familiarity
with the material being memorized. He created 2,300 onesyllable consonant-vowel-consonant combinations—such
as taz, bok, and lef— to facilitate his study of learning independent of meaning. He divided syllables into a series of
lists that he memorized under fixed conditions. Recording
the average amount of time it took him to memorize these
lists perfectly, he then varied the conditions to arrive at observations about the effects of such variables as speed, list
length, and number of repetitions. He also studied the factors involved in retention of the memorized material, comparing the initial memorization time with the time needed
for a second memorization of the same material after a
given period of time (such as 24 hours) and subsequent
memorization attempts. These results showed the existence
of a regular forgetting curve over time that approximated
a mathematical function similar to that in Fechner’s study.
After a steep initial decline in learning time between the
first and second memorization, the curve leveled off progressively with subsequent efforts.
Ebbinghaus also measured immediate memory,
showing that a subject could generally remember between six and eight items after an initial look at one of his
lists. In addition, he studied comparative learning rates
for meaningful and meaningless material, concluding that
meaningful items, such as words and sentences, could be
learned much more efficiently than nonsense syllables.
His experiments also yielded observations about the
value of evenly spaced as opposed to massed memorization. A monumental amount of time and effort went into
this ground-breaking research. For example, to determine
the effects of number of repetitions on retention, Ebbinghaus tested himself on 420 lists of 16 syllables 340 times
each, for a total of 14,280 trials. After careful accumulation and analysis of data, Ebbinghaus published the results of his research in the volume On Memory in 1885,
while on the faculty of the University of Berlin. Although
Wundt argued that results obtained by using nonsense
syllables had limited applicability to the actual memorization of meaningful material, Ebbinghaus’s work has
been widely used as a model for research on human verbal learning, and Über Gedachtnis (On Memory) has remained one of the most cited and highly respected
sourcebooks in the history of psychology.
In 1894, Ebbinghaus joined the faculty of the University of Breslau. While studying the mental capacities
of children in 1897, he began developing a sentence
204

completion test that is still widely used in the measurement of intelligence. This test, which he worked on
until 1905, was probably the first successful test of mental ability. Ebbinghaus also served on the faculties of the
Friedrich Wilhelm University and the University of
Halle. He was a cofounder of the first German psychology journal, the Journal of Psychology and Physiology of
the Sense Organs, in 1890, and also wrote two successful textbooks, The Principles of Psychology (1902) and
A Summary of Psychology (1908), both of which went
into several editions. His achievements represented a
major advance for psychology as a distinct scientific discipline and many of his methods continue to be followed
in verbal learning research.
See also Forgetting curve; Intelligence quotient

John C. Eccles
1903-1997
Australian neurophysiologist known for his research in nerve cell communication.

John Carew Eccles was a neurophysiologist whose
research explained how nerve cells communicate with
one another. He demonstrated that when a nerve cell is
stimulated it releases a chemical that binds to the membrane of neighboring cells and activates them in turn. He
further demonstrated that by the same mechanism a
nerve cell can also inhibit the electrical activity of nearby nerve cells. For this research, Eccles shared the 1963
Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine with Alan Lloyd
Hodgkin and Andrew Huxley.
Born on January 27, 1903, in Melbourne, Australia,
Eccles was the son of William James and Mary Carew
Eccles. Both of his parents were teachers, and they taught
him at home until he entered Melbourne High School in
1915. In 1919, Eccles began medical studies at Melbourne
University, where he participated in athletics and graduated in 1925 with the highest academic honors. Eccles’s
academic excellence was rewarded with a Rhodes Scholarship, which allowed him to pursue a graduate degree in
England at Oxford University. In September 1925, Eccles
began studies at Magdalen College, Oxford. As he had
done at Melbourne, Eccles excelled academically, receiving high honors for science and being named a Christopher Welch Scholar. In 1927, he received appointment as a
junior research fellow at Exeter College, Oxford.

Embarks on neurological research
Even before leaving Melbourne for Oxford, Eccles
had decided that he wanted to study the brain and the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

John C. Eccles

nervous system, and he was determined to work on
these subjects with Charles Scott Sherrington. Sherrington, who would win the Nobel Prize in 1932, was then
the world’s leading neurophysiologist; his research had
virtually founded the field of cellular neurophysiology.
The following year, after becoming a junior fellow, Eccles realized his goal and became one of Sherrington’s
research assistants. Although Sherrington was then
nearly seventy years old, Eccles collaborated with him
on some of his most important research. Together, they
studied the factors responsible for inhibiting a neuron,
or a nerve cell. They also explored what they termed the
“motor unit”—a nerve cell which coordinates the actions of many muscle fibers. Sherrington and Eccles
conducted their research without the benefit of the electronic devices that would later be developed to measure
a nerve cell’s electrical activity. For this work on neural
excitation and inhibition, Eccles was awarded his doctorate in 1929.
Eccles remained at Exeter after receiving his doctorate, serving as a Staines Medical Fellow from 1932 to
1934. During this period, he also held posts at Magdalen
College as tutor and demonstrator in physiology. The research that Eccles had begun in Sherrington’s laboratory
continued, but instead of describing the process of neural
inhibition, Eccles became increasingly interested in explaining the process that underlies inhibition. He and
other neurophysiologists believed that the transmission
of electrical impulses was responsible for neural inhibition. Bernhard Katz and Paul Fatt later demonstrated,
however, that it was a chemical mechanism and not a
wholly electrical phenomenon which was primarily responsible for inhibiting nerve cells.

Returns to Australia
In 1937, Eccles returned to Australia to assume
the directorship of the Kanematsu Memorial Institute
for Pathology in Sydney. During the late 1930s and
early 1940s, the Kanematsu Institute, under his guidance, became an important center for the study of neurophysiology. With Katz, Stephen Kuffler, and others,
he undertook research on the activity of nerve and
muscle cells in cats and frogs, studying how nerve
cells communicate with muscle or motor cells. His
team proposed that the binding of a chemical (now
known to be the neurotransmitter acetylcholine) by
the muscle cell led to a depolarization, or a loss of
electrical charge, in the muscle cell. This depolarization, Eccles believed, occurred because charged ions in
the muscle cell were released into the exterior of the
cell when the chemical substance released by the nerve
cell was bound to the muscle cell.

Sir John Eccles (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

During World War II, Eccles served as a medical
consultant to the Australian army, where he studied vision, hearing, and other medical problems faced by pilots. Returning to full-time research and teaching in
1944, Eccles became professor of physiology at the University of Otago in Dunedin, New Zealand. At Otago,
Eccles continued the research that had been interrupted
by the war, but now he attempted to describe in greater
detail the neural transmission event, using very fine electrodes made of glass. This research continued into the
early 1950s, and it convinced Eccles that transmission
from nerve cell to nerve cell or nerve cell to muscle cell
occurred by a chemical mechanism, not an electrical
mechanism as he had thought earlier.
In 1952, Eccles left Otago for the Australian National University in Canberra. Here, along with Fatt and J. S.
Coombs, he studied the inhibitory process in postsynaptic cells, which are the nerve or muscle cells that are affected by nerve cells. They were able to establish that
whether nerve and muscle cells were excited or inhibited
was controlled by pores in the membrane of the cells,
through which ions could enter or leave. By the late
1950s and early 1960s, Eccles had turned his attention to
higher neural processes, pursuing research on neural
pathways and the cellular organization of the brain.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

205

Echolalia

Begins a second career in the United States
In 1966, Eccles turned sixty-three and university
policy at the Australian National University required
him to retire. Wanting to continue his research career,
he accepted an invitation from the American Medical
Association to become the director of its Institute for
Biomedical Research in Chicago. He left that institution in 1968 to become professor of physiology and
medicine and the Buswell Research Fellow at the State
University of New York in Buffalo. The university constructed a laboratory for him where he could continue
his research on transmission in nerves. Even at a late
stage in his career, Eccles’s work suggested important
relationships between the excitation and inhibition of
nerves and the storing and processing of information
by the brain.
In 1975, he retired from SUNY with the title of Professor Emeritus, subsequently moving to Switzerland.
During the final period of his career, Eccles focused on a
variety of fundamental problems relating to consciousness and identity, conducting research in areas where
physiology, psychology, and philosophy intersect. He
died at his home in Contra, Switzerland.
Eccles received a considerable number of scientific
distinctions. His memberships included the Royal Society of London, the Royal Society of New Zealand, and
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He was
awarded the Gotch Memorial Prize in 1927, and the
Rolleston Memorial Prize in 1932. The Royal College of
Physicians presented him with their Baly Medal in 1961,
the Royal Society gave him their Royal Medal in 1962,
and the German Academy awarded him the Cothenius
Medal in 1963. Also in 1963, he shared the Nobel Prize
for Physiology and Medicine with Alan Hodgkin and
Andrew Huxley. He was knighted in 1958.
In 1928, Eccles married Irene Frances Miller of
New Zealand. The marriage, which eventually ended in
divorce in 1968, produced four sons and five daughters.
One of their daughters, Rosamond, earned her doctorate
and participated with her father in his research. After his
divorce from Irene Eccles, Eccles married the Czech
neurophysiologist Helena Tabořiková in 1968. Dr.
Tabořiková also collaborated with Eccles in his scientific
research.
See also Central nervous system
D. George Joseph
Further Reading
Fox, D., and M. Meldrum, eds. Nobel Laureates in Medicine
or Physiology. New York: Garland, 1990.
206

Fox, D., and M. Meldrum, eds. One Hundred Most Important
People in the World Today. New York: Putnam, 1970.

Echolalia
Repetition of another person’s words or phrases.

Using a mechanical, robotlike speech pattern, an individual with certain mental disorders may repeat words or
phrases spoken by others. Known as echolalia, this behavior is observed in children with autism, Tourette’s syndrome, schizophrenia, and certain other brain disorders.

Educational psychology
The study of the process of education, e.g., how
people, especially children, learn and which teaching methods and materials are most successful.

Educational psychology departments in many universities provide training to educators, school psychologists, and other educational professionals. Applied research in this field focuses on how to improve teaching,
solve learning problems, and measure learning ability
and progress. Other concerns of educational psychology
include cognitive development, the dynamics of pupil
behavior, and the psychological atmosphere of the classroom. Educational psychologists devise achievement
tests, evaluate teaching methods, develop learning aids
and curricula, and investigate how children of different
ages learn. They often serve as researchers and educators at teacher training institutions, in university psychology departments, on the staffs of educational research organizations, and also work in government
agencies, business, and the military. An educational psychologist might investigate areas as diverse as the causes of dyslexia and the measures that can be taken to
help dyslexics improve their reading and learning skills;
gender differences in mathematical ability; anxiety in
education; the effect of television on study habits; the
identification of gifted children; how teachers affect student behavior; and creative thinking in children of a specific grade level or age.
Educational psychology in the United States has its
roots in the pioneering work of the 1890s by two of the
country’s foremost psychologists, William James and
John Dewey. James—who is known for his 1899 volume, Talks to Teachers on Psychology —pioneered the
concept of taking psychology out of the laboratory and
applying it to problems in the real world. He advocated

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In the twentieth century, the theoretical and practical
branches of educational psychology have developed separately from each other. The name most prominently associated with the scientific, experimental focus is that of
Edward L. Thorndike, often called “the father of educational psychology.” Applying the learning principles he
had discovered in his animal research to humans,
Thorndike became a pioneer in the application of psychological principles to such areas as the teaching of
reading, language development, and mental testing. His
Introduction to the Theory of Mental and Social Measurements (1904) gave users of intelligence tests access
to statistical data about test results. Although
Thorndike’s emphases were on conditioning and scientific measurement, he was both directly and indirectly
responsible for a number of curricular and methodological changes in education throughout the United States.
Thorndike is especially well-known as an opponent of
the traditional Latin and Greek classical curriculum used
in secondary schools, which he helped to discontinue by
demonstrating that progress in one subject did not substantially influence progress in another—the major
premise on which classical education had been based.
The work of Thorndike’s contemporary, Charles
Hubbard Judd (1873-1946), provided a marked contrast in
its more pragmatic focus on transforming contemporary
educational policies and practices. Judd served as director
of the University of Chicago School of Education, where
he disseminated his philosophy of education. His research
interests were applied to the study of school subjects and
teaching methods. Concerned with school organization as
well, Judd recommended the establishment of both junior
high schools and junior colleges and championed equal
education opportunities for students of all backgrounds.
His published books include Psychology of High School
Subjects (1915), Psychology of Secondary Education
(1927), and Genetic Psychology for Teachers (1939).

Other educational psychologists have focused their
work on either measurement and learning theory or
school and curriculum reform. The contributions of G.
Stanley Hall (1844-1924) to the field of intelligence
testing were especially significant and influential. He
passed on his view of intelligence as an inherited trait to
two of his most famous students, Arnold Gesell and
Lewis Terman. It was Terman who introduced the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scales in the United States in
1916, creating new norms based on American standardizing groups. Gesell also made important contributions
to the study of human development, and by the 1930s,
this subject had become a part of the standard educational psychology texts, and today it is a central area in the
field. The learning process, a related area that is also traditionally studied, includes such issues as hierarchies of
learning activities, the relationship of learning to motivation, and effective instructional methods.
The study of evaluation has remained a central part
of the educational psychology and includes techniques
for assessing learning, achievement, and behavior;
analysis of individual differences; and methods of addressing learning problems. Another relevant area is that
of mental health in the classroom ( personality integration; adjustment problems; teacher-pupil interaction). In recent years, the trend has been toward a more
“holistic” and humanistic approach that stresses the
learner’s affective needs in the context of cognitive
processes. A growing area of emphasis for all education
professionals is educating individuals with special
needs. Current psychological theory and practice—as
well as federal law—rejects the traditional exclusionary
approach in dealing with disabled or emotionally troubled children and adolescents. Mainstreaming such students is now common practice, with the goal of expanding boundaries and reducing the barriers between exceptional or atypical students and mainstream students. Educational psychology must now concern itself with such
issues as systems for classification of children and
teenagers as mentally retarded or deviant; creation of alternative educational environments and intervention
programs that promote the development of the special
needs population and the requisite teaching strategies
and skills; and the creation, where necessary, of individualized educational plans.
Division 15 of the American Psychological Association (APA) is devoted to educational psychology. Its members are mostly faculty members at universities, although
some work in school settings. In 1982, nearly 14 percent of
the members of the APA were members of this division
and identified themselves as educational psychologists.
Professional journals in educational psychology include
Journal of Educational Psychology, Educational Psycholo-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

207

Educational psychology

the study of educational problems in their natural environment, the classroom, and viewed classroom interactions and observations as a legitimate source of scientific
data. John Dewey, the country’s most famous advocate
of active learning, founded an experimental school at the
University of Chicago to develop and study new educational methods. Dewey experimented with educational
curricula and methods and advocated parental participation in the educational process. His philosophy of education stressed learning by doing, as opposed to authoritarian teaching methods and rote learning, and his ideas
have had a strong impact on the theory and practice of
education in the United States. Dewey’s first influential
book on education, The School and Society (1899), was
adapted from a series of lectures to parents of the pupils
in his school at the University of Chicago.

Effector

gist, Educational Researcher, Review of Educational Research, and American Educational Research Journal.
Further Reading
Dembo, Myron H. Applying Educational Psychology. 5th ed.
New York: Longman, 1994.
Eysenck, Michael W. Individual Differences: Normal and Abnormal. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1994.
Farnham-Diggory, Sylvia. Cognitive Processes in Education.
2nd ed. New York: HarperCollins, 1992.

Effector
Peripheral tissue at the outer end of an efferent
neural path (one leading away from the central nervous system).

An effector acts in special ways in response to a
nerve impulse. In humans, effectors may either be muscles, which contract in response to neural stimuli, or
glands, which produce secretions. The muscles are generally divided into two groupings: somatic effectors,
which are the body’s striated muscles (such as those
found in the arm and back), and autonomic effectors,
which are smooth muscles (such as the iris of the eye).
Both types of effectors are linked to the gray matter
of the spinal cord, but each system originates in a different portion of it. The somatic effectors, which are responsible for powerful motor movements, are linked to
the ventral horn cell, a large neuron in the ventral portion of the gray matter. The autonomic effectors receive
impulses from the lateral part of the gray matter. The
smooth muscles that are supplied by these effectors
maintain the tone of blood vessels walls, thus helping to
regulate blood pressure. Glandular secretions controlled
by autonomic effectors include external secretions, such
as sweat, and internal ones, such as the hormone epinephrine secreted by the adrenal medulla of the brain.
Some nerve fibers that connect with autonomic effectors
also pass through the ventral roots of the spinal nerves
by way of a ganglion located outside the spinal cord and
are then distributed to smooth muscles and glands.
Further Reading
ABC’s of the Human Mind. Pleasantville, NY: Reader’s Digest
Association, 1990.

Ego
In psychoanalytic theory, the part of human personality that combines innate biological impulses
208

(id) or drives with reality to produce appropriate
behavior.

Sigmund Freud believed that human personality
has three components: the id, the ego and the superego.
In his scheme, the id urges immediate action on such
basic needs as eating, drinking, and eliminating wastes
without regard to consequences. The ego is that portion
of the personality that imposes realistic limitations on
such behavior. It decides whether id-motivated behavior
is appropriate, given the prevailing social and environmental conditions.
While the id operates on the “pleasure principle,”
the ego uses the “reality principle” to determine whether
to satisfy or delay fulfilling the id’s demands. The ego
considers the consequences of actions to modify the
powerful drives of the id. A person’s own concept of
what is acceptable determines the ego’s decisions. The
ego also must “negotiate” with the superego
(conscience) in the often bitter battle between the id’s
drives and a person’s own sense of right and wrong. Repression and anxiety may result when the ego consistently overrides the id’s extreme demands.
Further Reading
Atkinson, Rita L.; Richard C. Atkinson; Edward E. Smith; and
Ernest R. Hilgard. Introduction to Psychology. 9th ed. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. 12th ed. Glenview,
IL: Scott, Foresman, 1988.

Electra complex
See Oedipus complex

Electrical stimulation of the
brain (ESB)
A procedure which involves the introduction of a
weak electrical current into specific locations in
the brain by using multiple microelectrodes to
apply short pulses of electrical currents intended to
mimic the natural flow of impulses through the
neural pathways.

Electrical stimulation of the brain (ESB) is useful
in a variety of situations, including neurosurgical operations and experimental research. In neurosurgery, this
procedure may be used to assist physicians in determin-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In experimental research, ESB does not control complex behavior patterns such as depression, but it can be
employed quite successfully to control individual functions. Therefore, this procedure has proven useful in
studying the relationships among various areas and structures of the brain and the activities they control. It has
been found, for example, that stimulation of the visual
cortex produces visual sensations, such as bursts of light
or color (blind people have seen spots of light as a result
of ESB). Similarly, stimulation of the auditory cortex results in aural sensation, while stimulating areas associated with motor control produces arm, leg, or other body
movements. Stimulation of areas of the brain linked to association can induce memories of scenes or events.
In addition to research and experimental uses, electrical brain stimulation has been successfully used for
some therapeutic purposes. Brain stem and cerebellar
stimulation have aided in some movement disorders;
peroneal nerve stimulation has been used to treat dropfoot in stroke victims; and transcutaneous nerve, dorsalcolumn, and deep-brain stimulation have proven useful
in the relief of chronic severe pain.
Electrical brain stimulation has aided in mapping
connections between different regions of the brain in animals, and has been used to induce many different types
of behavior in animals, including eating, drinking, aggression, hoarding, and both sexual and maternal behavior. While hypothalamic stimulation is associated with
such emotional responses as attack and defense, stimulation of the reticular formation in the brain stem can induce sleep. ESB has also confirmed the existence of a
“reward center” in animals, whereby animals can be
taught to stimulate their own brains mechanically by
pressing a lever when such stimulation results in a pleasant sensation.

Electroconvulsive therapy
(ECT)
The application of a mild electric current to the
brain to produce an epileptic-like seizure as a
means of treating certain psychological disorders,
primarily severe depression.

Electroconvulsive therapy, also known as ECT and
electroshock therapy, was developed in the 1930s when

various observations led physicians to conclude that
epileptic seizures might prevent or relieve the symptoms
of schizophrenia. After experiments with insulin and
other potentially seizure-inducing drugs, Italian physicians pioneered the use of an electric current to create
seizures in schizophrenic patients.
ECT was routinely used to treat schizophrenia, depression, and, in some cases, mania. It eventually became
a source of controversy due to misuse and negative side
effects. ECT was used indiscriminately and was often prescribed for treating disorders on which it had no real effect, such as alcohol dependence, and was used for punitive reasons. Patients typically experienced confusion and
loss of memory after treatments, and even those whose
condition improved eventually relapsed. Other side effects
of ECT include speech defects, physical injury from the
force of the convulsions, and cardiac arrest. Use of electroconvulsive therapy declined after 1960 with the introduction of antidepressant and antipsychotic drugs.
ECT is still used today but with less frequency and
with modifications that have made the procedure safer and
less unpleasant. Anesthetics and muscle relaxants are usually administered to prevent bone fractures or other injuries from muscle spasms. Patients receive approximately
4 to 10 treatments administered over a period of about two
weeks. Confusion and memory loss are minimized by the
common practice of applying the current only to the nondominant brain hemisphere, usually the right-brain
hemisphere. Nevertheless, some memory loss still occurs; anterograde memory (the ability to learn new material) returns relatively rapidly following treatment, but retrograde memory (the ability to remember past events) is
more strongly affected. There is a marked memory deficit
one week after treatment which gradually improves over
the next six or seven months. In many cases, however,
subtle memory losses persist even beyond this point, and
can be serious and debilitating for some patients.
About 100,000 people in the United States receive
electroconvulsive therapy annually. ECT can only be administered with the informed consent of the patient and is
used primarily for severely depressed patients who have
not responded to antidepressant medications or whose
suicidal impulses make it dangerous to wait until such
medications can take effect. ECT is also administered to
patients with bipolar disorder. Contrary to the theories
of those who first pioneered its use, ECT is not an effective treatment for schizophrenia unless the patient is also
suffering from depression. The rate of relapse after administration of ECT can be greatly diminished when it is
accompanied by other forms of treatment.
Researchers are still not sure exactly how electroconvulsive therapy works, although it is known that the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

209

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)

ing which brain tissue should be removed. Because the
patient must remain awake during the procedure, only a
local anesthetic is administered. Focal epilepsy has been
surgically treated by using electrical brain stimulation in
conscious patients to determine the epileptic focus.

Electroencephalograph (EEG)

seizures rather than the electric current itself are the
basis for the treatment’s effects, and that seizures can affect the functioning of neurotransmitters in the brain, including norepinephrine and serotonin, which are associated with depression. They also increase the release of
pituitary hormones. Because of its possible side effects,
as well as the public’s level of discomfort with both electrical shock and the idea of inducing seizures, ECT remains a controversial treatment method. In 1982, the city
of Berkeley, California, passed a referendum making the
administration of ECT a misdemeanor punishable by
fines of up to $500 and six months in prison, but the law
was later overturned.
Further Reading
Electroconvulsive Therapy: Theory and Practice. New York:
Raven Press, 1979.

Electroencephalograph (EEG)
A device used to record the electrical activity of
the brain.

Electroencephalography is used for a variety of research and diagnostic purposes. It is usually conducted
using electrodes, metal discs attached to the scalp or to
wires connected to the skull or even to the brain itself.
The signals obtained through the electrodes must then be
amplified in order to be interpreted. EEG patterns typically take the form of waves, which may be measured
according to both their frequency and size (also referred
to as amplitude). The electrical activity of animals’
brains had been recorded as early as 1875, but it was not
until 1929 that the first human EEG was reported by
Austrian psychiatrist Anton Berger. Since then, it has
been used to study the effects of drugs on the brain, as
well as the localization of certain behavioral functions in
specific areas of the brain. EEGs have also been widely
used in sleep research. While the deeper stages of sleep
are characterized by large, slow, irregular brain waves,
and, in some cases, bursts of high-amplitude waves
called “sleep spindles,” REM (rapid eye movement)
sleep, during which most vivid dreaming occurs, resembles the faster brain-wave pattern of the waking state.
As a diagnostic tool, EEGs have been used to diagnose epilepsy, strokes, infections, hemorrhages, inadequate blood supply to the brain, and certain tumors. They
are especially useful because they can pinpoint the location of tumors and injuries to the brain. EEGs are also
used to monitor patients in a coma and, during surgery,
to indicate the effectiveness of anesthetics.
210

Further Reading
Cooper, R. EEG Technology. New York: Butterworth, 1980.

David Elkind
1931American psychologist and educator.

Psychologist and educator David Elkind was born in
Detroit, Michigan, to Peter and Bessie (maiden name Nelson) E. Elkind. He and his family moved to California
when he was an adolescent. He received the Bachelor of
Arts from the University of California at Los Angeles
(UCLA) in 1952, and his Doctorate in Philosophy (Ph.D.)
from UCLA in 1955. He also received an honorary Doctorate in Science from Rhode Island College in 1987.
Elkind’s father operated machinery in a factory that
built parts for the automotive industry. Elkind remembered his father complaining about how the engineers
who designed the parts did not understand the machinery
his father was working with and thus sometimes designed things the machines could not create. This memory stuck with Elkind so that he always tried to consider
the relationship between theory and practice, how theory
could and would be applied.
After receiving his Ph.D., Elkind was a research assistant to David Rappaport at the Austen Riggs Center in
Stockbridge, Massachusetts. There he was first exposed
to the research and theory of Jean Piaget. From 1964 to
1965, Elkind was a national Science Foundation Senior
Postdoctoral Fellow at Piaget’s Institut d’Epistemologie
Genetique in Geneva, Switzerland.
Piaget, originally trained as a biologist, studied and
observed children for over fifty years. He sought to understand how children formed knowledge of the world
around them, and his theories of cognitive development
have been extremely influential in psychology. Much of
Elkind’s work can be seen as an attempt to duplicate,
build upon, and more fully explore Piaget’s theory and
research. Elkind’s research has focused on cognitive,
perceptual, and social development in children and adolescents, as well as the causes and effects of stress on
children, adolescents, and families. Throughout all of his
work, Elkind has tried to apply theory and research to
real life arenas, such as psychotherapy, parenting, and
education. And he uses real life experiences to shape his
theory and research.
One of Elkind’s most well-known contributions to
psychology is his work on adolescent psychology in
which he expands on Piaget’s description of adolescent
egocentrism (difficulty in distinguishing between the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In his more recent work, Elkind has turned his attention to educational methods, and how recent changes in
society and the family affect children, adolescents, and
the family unit. Another aspect of Elkind’s work has
been his focus on learning and healthy development. He
believes that children need to have many and varied experiences to develop in a healthy way, and that this is
also necessary for children to truly learn about and understand things. Elkind thinks parents pushing their infants and children to learn at earlier and earlier ages does
not allow a child time to have the “rich” experiences necessary to absorb and learn in a deep and meaningful way.
Elkind is a well-respected speaker and author. He
has written more than 400 book chapters and articles,
and several stories for children. His numerous books include Reinventing Childhood (1998), All Grown Up and
No Place to Go (1998), and Ties That Stress: The New
Family Imbalance (1994).

David Elkind (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with
permission.)

mental occupations of the self and those of other people). Elkind looked at how this egocentrism affects adolescent thought, behavior, and emotion.
According to Piagetian theory, the abilities to separate oneself from one’s own thoughts and analyze them,
as well as conceptualizing others’ thoughts is developed
only at young adolescence. Elkind describes how young
adolescents, because they are undergoing major physiological changes, are preoccupied by themselves. The
egocentrism of adolescents lies in their belief that others
are as preoccupied with their appearance and behavior as
they are. As a consequence, the adolescent anticipates
other people’s responses and thoughts about herself, and
is, in a way, constantly creating or reacting to an imaginary audience.
According to Elkind, this probably plays a role in
the self-consciousness so common in early adolescence,
as well as other experiences in this period of life. Elkind
also introduced the idea of the personal fable, in which
the adolescent constructs a story about herself, a version
of her life stressing the uniqueness of her feelings and
experiences. Indeed, these ideas of personal uniqueness
are also seen in a common conviction that the adolescent
will not die. Elkind stressed how he found these con-

In line with his efforts to apply research findings to
practical problems, he has tried to communicate to the
general public how his research relates to education and
child rearing through writing articles for popular publications such as the magazine Good Housekeeping. In addition, he has appeared on numerous televisions shows
including the Oprah Winfrey Show, The Today Show, and
The CBS Morning News. He is member of the editorial
board for a number of prestigious scientific journals, including the Journal of Youth and Adolescence, Bulletin
of the Menninger Clinic, Education Digest, Journal of
Science and Education, and Montessori Life.
Among his professional positions, from 1966 to
1978 Elkind served as Professor and Director of Graduate Training in Developmental Psychology at the Department of Psychology at the University of Rochester, New
York. He also served as President of the National Association for the Education of Young Children. He is currently a Professor in the Department of Child Development
at Tufts University in Medford, Massachusetts, which he
joined in 1978. He also co-hosts the Lifetime television
series Kids These Days. He has three sons and resides in
Massachusetts.
Marie Doorey
Further Reading
Corsini, R.J., ed. “Elkind, David (1931- ).” In Encyclopedia of
psychology, 2nd ed. V. 4. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Elkind, D. Reinventing Childhood. Rosemont, NJ: Modern
Learning Press, 1998.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

211

David Elkind

cepts useful in understanding and treating troubled adolescents. Elkind believes the egocentrism of early adolescence usually lessens by the age of 15 or 16 as cognitive
development proceeds.

Albert Ellis

Elkind, D. Ties that Stress: The New Family Imbalance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994.
“Elkind, D.” In Who’s Who in America, 54th Edition. Wilmette, IL: Marquis Who’s Who, 1998.
Elkind, D. Egocentrism in Adolescence. In Readings in Developmental Psychology, 2nd Ed., pp. 383-90. Eds: Gardner,
Judith Krieger and Gardner, Ed. Boston: Little, Brown
and Company. From David Elkind. 1967. Egocentrism in
Adolescence. Child Development, 38,1025-33. Published
by the Society for Research in Child Development.
Lapsley, D.K. “Toward an integrated theory of adolescent ego
development: The ‘new look’ at adolescent egocentrism.”
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 63, (1993): 562-71.
Reber, A.S. The Penguin Dictionary of Psychology. Middlesex,
England: Penguin Books, 1985.
Sheehy, N. Chapman, A.J., and Conroy, W.A. “Elkind, D.” In
Biographical dictionary of psychology. London and New
York: Routledge, 1997.
Twentieth Annual Great Plains Students’ Psychology Convention Website, 3/00, Missouri Western State College, St.
Joseph, MO. http://www.psych-central.com/GPconvention.
biograph.htm
Tuft’s Child and Family News Feature News Service for Journalists Child & Family News Advisory Board Website,
http://www.tufts.edu/cfn/who.shtml

Further Information
Tufts University, Department of Child Development. Medford,
MA, USA. 02155.

Albert Ellis
1913American psychologist who originated rationalemotive therapy (RET), also known for his work as
an author and counselor in the areas of marriage
and sexuality.

Raised in the Bronx, New York, Albert Ellis was shy
and physically frail when he was young. Although he had
literary ambitions in his teens and twenties, he earned degrees in accounting and business. While in his twenties,
he found that he had a gift for advising his friends on sexual matters and undertook an intensive independent study
of human sexuality. Deciding to become a professional
therapist, he earned a Ph.D. in clinical psychology at the
Teachers College at Columbia University in 1947, followed by four years of psychoanalytic training with
Charles R. Hulbeck at the Karen Horney Institute. By
1952, he had a full-time practice in Manhattan.
However, Ellis soon became dissatisfied with the
limits of psychoanalysis. He found it slow and ineffective, and he was frustrated with the passive role it assigned to the therapist. In 1953 he began experimenting
with different therapeutic techniques, and within two
212

Albert Ellis (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with
permission.)

years he developed rational-emotive therapy (RET),
which he then began to practice and advocate in writing.
It was based on the idea that psychological problems are
caused by self-defeating thoughts (such as “I must be
loved or approved by everyone” and “If I don’t find the
perfect solution to this problem, a catastrophe will result”). Once such thoughts are changed, emotional and
behavioral changes will follow. The therapist’s task is to
help the client recognize illogical and self-destructive
ways of thinking and replace them with healthier, more
positive ones. Ellis outlined an active role for the therapist: his own therapeutic style involved continually challenging the client’s illogical and self-destructive ideas in
a dynamic and provocative manner.
When Ellis first began promoting his new system of
therapy, it was met with widespread professional opposition. However, the growing dissatisfaction with behaviorism created a climate that was more hospitable to a
therapeutic method like RET that emphasized the role of
cognition in changing behavior. Other psychologists, including Aaron Beck and social learning theorist Julian
Rotter, developed their own cognitive-oriented therapies, and Ellis found himself the pioneer of a new school
of therapy—the cognitive-behavioral approach. He has
described himself as “the father of RET and the grandfa-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

infant engages a person in a social act, doing so by expressing pleasure (a smile), which consequently elicits a
positive response. This cycle brings about a mutually reinforcing pattern in which both the infant and the other
person gain pleasure from the social interaction.

Further Reading

As infants become more aware of their environment, smiling occurs in response to a wider variety of
contexts. They may smile when they see a toy they have
previously enjoyed. They may smile when receiving
praise for accomplishing a difficult task. Smiles such as
these, like the social smile, are considered to serve a developmental function.

Bernard, M. E. Staying Alive in an Irrational World: Albert
Ellis and Rational-Emotive Therapy. South Melbourne,
Australia: Carlson/Macmillan, 1986.
Ellis, A., and W. Dryden. The Essential Albert Ellis. New York:
Springer, 1990.

Emotional development
The process by which infants and children begin
developing the capacity to experience, express,
and interpret emotions.

The study of the emotional development of infants
and children is relatively new, having been studied empirically only during the past few decades. Researchers have
approached this area from a variety of theoretical perspectives, including those of social constructionism, differential emotion theory, and social learning theory. Each of
these approaches explores the way infants and children
develop emotionally, differing mainly on the question of
whether emotions are learned or biologically predetermined, as well as debating the way infants and children
manage their emotional experiences and behavior.

Early infancy (birth-six months)
Emotional expressivity
To formulate theories about the development of
human emotions, researchers focus on observable display
of emotion, such as facial expressions and public behavior. A child’s private feelings and experiences cannot be
studied by researchers, so interpretation of emotion must
be limited to signs that can be observed. Although many
descriptions of facial patterns appear intuitively to represent recognizable emotions, psychologists differ on the
their views on the range of emotions experienced by infants. It is not clear whether infants actually experience
these emotions, or if adults, using adult facial expressions
as the standard, simply superimpose their own understanding of the meaning of infant facial expressions.
Between six and ten weeks, a social smile emerges,
usually accompanied by other pleasure-indicative actions
and sounds, including cooing and mouthing. This social
smile occurs in response to adult smiles and interactions.
It derives its name from the unique process by which the

Laughter, which begins at around three or four
months, requires a level of cognitive development because it demonstrates that the child can recognize incongruity. That is, laughter is usually elicited by actions that
deviate from the norm, such as being kissed on the abdomen or a caregiver playing peek-a-boo. Because it fosters reciprocal interactions with others, laughter promotes social development.

Later infancy (7-12 months)
Emotional expressivity
During the last half of the first year, infants begin
expressing fear, disgust, and anger because of the maturation of cognitive abilities. Anger, often expressed by
crying, is a frequent emotion expressed by infants. As is
the case with all emotional expressions, anger serves an
adaptive function, signaling to caregivers of the infant’s
discomfort or displeasure, letting them know that something needs to be changed or altered. Although some infants respond to distressing events with sadness, anger is
more common.
Fear also emerges during this stage as children become able to compare an unfamiliar event with what
they know. Unfamiliar situations or objects often elicit
fear responses in infants. One of the most common is the
presence of an adult stranger, a fear that begins to appear
at about seven months. The degree to which a child reacts with fear to new situations is dependent on a variety
of factors. One of the most significant is the response of
its mother or caregiver. Caregivers supply infants with a
secure base from which to explore their world, and accordingly an exploring infant will generally not move
beyond eyesight of the caregiver. Infants repeatedly
check with their caregivers for emotional cues regarding
safety and security of their explorations. If, for instance,
they wander too close to something their caregiver perceives as dangerous, they will detect the alarm in the
caregiver’s facial expression, become alarmed themselves, and retreat from the potentially perilous situation.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

213

Emotional development

ther of cognitive-behavioral therapy.” Ellis has also published numerous books on sexuality, including several
popular best sellers (such as Sex Without Guilt ) associated with the “sexual revolution” of the 1960s, and he was
an innovator in the area of sex and marital therapy.

Emotional development

Infants look to caregivers for facial cues for the appropriate reaction to unfamiliar adults. If the stranger is a trusted friend of the caregiver, the infant is more likely to respond favorably, whereas if the stranger is unknown to
the caregiver, the infant may respond with anxiety and
distress. Another factor is the infant’s temperament.

culture may teach its children to express pride upon winning a competitive event, whereas another may teach
children to dampen their cheer, or even to feel shame at
another person’s loss.

A second fear of this stage is called separation anxiety. Infants seven to twelve months old may cry in fear if
the mother or caregiver leaves them in an unfamiliar place.

During this stage of development, toddlers acquire
language and are learning to verbally express their feelings. In 1986, Inge Bretherton and colleagues found that
30% of American 20-month-olds correctly labeled a series
of emotional and physiological states, including sleep-fatigue, pain, distress, disgust, and affection. This ability,
rudimentary as it is during early toddlerhood, is the first
step in the development of emotional self-regulation skills.

Many studies have been conducted to assess the
type and quality of emotional communication between
caregivers and infants. Parents are one of the primary
sources that socialize children to communicate emotional experience in culturally specific ways. That is, through
such processes as modeling, direct instruction, and imitation, parents teach their children which emotional expressions are appropriate to express within their specific
sub-culture and the broader social context.
Socialization of emotion begins in infancy. Research indicates that when mothers interact with their infants they demonstrate emotional displays in an exaggerated slow motion, and that these types of display are
highly interesting to infants. It is thought that this process
is significant in the infant’s acquisition of cultural and social codes for emotional display, teaching them how to
express their emotions, and the degree of acceptability associated with different types of emotional behaviors.
Another process that emerges during this stage is social referencing. Infants begin to recognize the emotions
of others, and use this information when reacting to novel
situations and people. As infants explore their world, they
generally rely on the emotional expressions of their
mothers or caregivers to determine the safety or appropriateness of a particular endeavor. Although this process
has been established by several studies, there is some debate about the intentions of the infant; are infants simply
imitating their mother’s emotional responses, or do they
actually experience a change in mood purely from the expressive visual cues of the mother? What is known, however, is that as infants explore their environment, their immediate emotional responses to what they encounter are
based on cues portrayed by their mother or primary caregiver, to whom they repeatedly reference as they explore.

Toddlerhood (1-2 years)

Emotional understanding

Although there is debate concerning an acceptable
definition of emotion regulation, it is generally thought
to involve the ability to recognize and label emotions,
and to control emotional expression in ways that are consistent with cultural expectations. In infancy, children
largely rely on adults to help them regulate their emotional states. If they are uncomfortable they may be able
to communicate this state by crying, but have little hope
of alleviating the discomfort on their own. In toddlerhood, however, children begin to develop skills to regulate their emotions with the emergence of language providing an important tool to assist in this process. Being
able to articulate an emotional state in itself has a regulatory effect in that it enables children to communicates
their feelings to a person capable of helping them manage their emotional state. Speech also enables children to
self-regulate, using soothing language to talk themselves
through difficult situations.
Empathy, a complex emotional response to a situation, also appears in toddlerhood, usually by age two.
The development of empathy requires that children read
others’ emotional cues, understand that other people are
entities distinct from themselves, and take the perspective of another person (put themselves in the position of
another). These cognitive advances typically are not evident before the first birthday. The first sign of empathy
in children occurs when they try to alleviate the distress
of another using methods that they have observed or experienced themselves. Toddlers will use comforting language and initiate physical contact with their mothers if
they are distressed, supposedly modeling their own early
experiences when feeling upset.

Emotional expressivity
During the second year, infants express emotions of
shame or embarrassment and pride. These emotions mature in all children and adults contribute to their development. However, the reason for the shame or pride is
learned. Different cultures value different actions. One
214

Preschool (3-6 years)
Emotional expressivity
Children’s capacity to regulate their emotional behavior continues to advance during this stage of development.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Beginning at about age four, children acquire the
ability to alter their emotional expressions, a skill of high
value in cultures that require frequent disingenuous social displays. Psychologists call these skills emotion display rules, culture-specific rules regarding the appropriateness of expressing in certain situations. As such, one’s
external emotional expression need not match one’s internal emotional state. For example, in Western culture,
we teach children that they should smile and say thankyou when receiving a gift, even if they really do not like
the present. The ability to use display rules is complex. It
requires that children understand the need to alter emotional displays, take the perspective of another, know
that external states need not match internal states, have
the muscular control to produce emotional expressions,
be sensitive to social contextual cues that alert them to
alter their expressivity, and have the motivation to enact
such discrepant displays in a convincing manner.
It is thought that in the preschool years, parents are the
primary socializing force, teaching appropriate emotional
expression in children. Moreover, children learn at about
age three that expressions of anger and aggression are to
be controlled in the presence of adults. Around peers, however, children are much less likely to suppress negative
emotional behavior. It appears that these differences arise
as a result of the different consequences they have received
for expressing negative emotions in front of adults as opposed to their peers. Further, this distinction made by children—as a function of social context—demonstrates that
preschoolers have begun to internalize society’s rules governing the appropriate expression of emotions.
Carolyn Saarni, an innovator in the exploration of
emotional development, has identified two types of emotional display rules, prosocial and self-protective. Prosocial display rules involve altering emotional displays in
order to protect another’s feelings. For example, a child
might not like the sweater she received from her aunt,
but would appear happy because she did not want to

make her aunt feel badly. On the other hand, self-protective display rules involve masking emotion in order to
save face or to protect oneself from negative consequences. For instance, a child may feign toughness when
he trips in front of his peers and scrapes his knee, in
order to avoid teasing and further embarrassment. In
1986 research findings were mixed concerning the order
in which prosocial and self-protective display rules are
learned. Some studies demonstrate that knowledge of
self-protective display rules emerges first, whereas other
studies show the opposite effect.
There also has been research done examining how
children alter their emotional displays. Researchers Jackie Gnepp and Debra Hess in 1986 found that there is
greater pressure on children to modify their verbal rather
than facial emotional expressions. It is easier for
preschoolers to control their verbal utterances than their
facial muscles.
Emotional understanding
Beginning at about age four or five, children develop a more sophisticated understanding of others’ emotional states. Although it has been demonstrated that empathy emerges at quite a young age, with rudimentary
displays emerging during toddlerhood, increasing cognitive development enables preschoolers to arrive at a
more complex understanding of emotions. Through repeated experiences, children begin to develop their own
theories of others’ emotional states by referring to causes
and consequences of emotions, and by observing and
being sensitive to behavioral cues that indicate emotional
distress. For instance, when asked why a playmate is
upset, a child might respond “Because the teacher took
his toy” or by reference to some other external cause,
usually one that relates to an occurrence familiar to
them. Children of this age are also beginning to make
predictions about others’ experience and expression of
emotions, such as predicting that a happy child will be
more likely to share his or her toys.

Middle childhood (7-11 years)
Emotional expressivity
Children ages seven to eleven display a wider variety
of self-regulation skills. Sophistication in understanding
and enacting cultural display rules has increased dramatically by this stage, such that by now children begin to
know when to control emotional expressivity as well as
have a sufficient repertoire of behavioral regulation skills
allowing them to effectively mask emotions in socially appropriate ways. Research has indicated that children at
this age have become sensitive to the social contextual

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

215

Emotional development

Parents help preschoolers acquire skills to cope with negative emotional states by teaching and modeling use of verbal reasoning and explanation. For example, when preparing a child for a potentially emotionally evocative event,
such as a trip to the doctor’s office or weekend at their
grandparents’ house, parents will often offer comforting
advice, such as “the doctor only wants to help” or “grandma and grandpa have all kinds of fun plans for the weekend.” This kind of emotional preparation is crucial for the
child if he or she is to develop the skills necessary to regulate their own negative emotional states. Children who
have trouble learning and/or enacting these types of coping skills often exhibit acting out types of behavior, or,
conversely, can become withdrawn when confronted with
fear or anxiety-provoking situations.

Emotional development

cues which serve to guide their decisions to express or
control negative emotions. Several factors influence their
emotion management decisions, including the type of
emotion experienced, the nature of their relationship with
the person involved in the emotional exchange, child age,
and child gender. Moreover, it appears that children have
developed a set of expectations concerning the likely outcome of expressing emotion to others. In general, children
report regulating anger and sadness more to friends than
mothers and fathers because they expect to receive a negative response—such as teasing or belittling—from friends.
With increasing age, however, older children report expressing negative emotions more often to their mothers
than their fathers, expecting dads to respond negatively to
an emotional display. These emotion regulation skills are
considered to be adaptive and deemed essential to establishing, developing, and maintaining social relationships.

more readily than those whose families avoid such topics. Furthermore, parents who set consistent behavioral
limits and who themselves show high levels of concern
for others are more likely to produce empathic children
than parents who are punitive or particularly harsh in restricting behavior.

Children at this age also demonstrate that they possess rudimentary cognitive and behavioral coping skills
that serve to lessen the impact of an emotional event and
in so doing, may in fact alter their emotional experience.
For example, when experiencing a negative emotional
event, children may respond by employing rationalization or minimization cognitive coping strategies, in
which they re-interpret or reconstruct the scenario to
make it seem less threatening or upsetting. Upon having
their bicycle stolen or being deprived of television for a
weekend, they might tell themselves, “It’s only a bike, at
least I didn’t get hurt” or “Maybe mom and dad will
make up something fun to do instead of watching TV.”

It is widely believed that by adolescence children
have developed a set of expectations, referred to as
scripts, about how various people will react to their emotional displays, and regulate their displays in accordance
with these scripts. Research in this area has found that in
early adolescence, children begin breaking the emotionally intimate ties with their parents and begin forming
them with peers. In one study, for instance, eighth-grade
students, particularly boys, reported regulating (hiding)
their emotions to (from) their mothers more than did either fifth- or eleventh-grade adolescents. This dip in
emotional expressivity towards mothers appeared to be
due to the boys’ expectations of receiving less emotional
support from their mothers. This particular finding
demonstrates the validity of the script hypothesis of selfregulations; children’s expectations of receiving little
emotional support from their mothers, perhaps based on
past experience, guide their decisions to regulate emotions more strictly in their mothers’ presence.

Emotional understanding
During middle childhood, children begin to understand that the emotional states of others are not as simple
as they imagined in earlier years, and that they are often the
result of complex causes, some of which are not externally
obvious. They also come to understand that it is possible to
experience more than one emotion at a time, although this
ability is somewhat restricted and evolves slowly. As Susan
Harter and Nancy Whitsell demonstrated, seven-year-old
children are able to understand that a person can feel two
emotions simultaneously, even if the emotions are positive
and negative. Children can feel happy and excited that their
parents bought them a bicycle, or angry and sad that a
friend had hurt them, but they deny the possibility of experiencing “mixed feelings.” It is not until age ten that children are capable of understanding that one can experience
two seemingly contradictory emotions, such as feeling
happy that they were chosen for a team but also nervous
about their responsibility to play well.
Displays of empathy also increase in frequency during this stage. Children from families that regularly discuss the complexity of feelings will develop empathy
216

Adolescence (12-18 years)
Emotional expressivity
Adolescents have become sophisticated at regulating their emotions. They have developed a wide vocabulary with which to discuss, and thus influence, emotional
states of themselves and others. Adolescents are adept at
interpreting social situations as part of the process of
managing emotional displays.

Another factor that plays a significant role in the
ways adolescents regulate emotional displays is their
heightened sensitivity to others’ evaluations of them, a
sensitivity which can result in acute self-awareness and
self-consciousness as they try to blend into the dominant
social structure. David Elkind has described adolescents
as operating as if they were in front of an imaginary audience in which every action and detail is noted and evaluated by others. As such, adolescents become very aware
of the impact of emotional expressivity on their social
interactions and fundamentally, on obtaining peer approval. Because guidelines concerning the appropriateness of emotional displays is highly culture-specific,
adolescents have the difficult task of learning when and
how to express or regulate certain emotions.
As expected, gender plays a significant role in the
types of emotions displayed by adolescents. Boys are

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

• Managing emotions. The ability to self-regulate emotions and manage them in others.

Characteristics
The brain and emotional learning

Janice Zeman
Further Reading
Bretherton, Inge and Janet Fritz, et al. “Learning to Talk about
Emotions: A Functionalist Perspective,” Child Development 57, (1986): 529-48.
Gnepp, Jackie, and Debra Hess. “Children’s Understanding of
Verbal and Facial Display Rules,” Developmental Psychology 22, no. 1, (1986): 103-08.
Malatesta, Carol Zander, and Jeannette Haviland. “Learning
Display Rules: The Socialization of Emotion Expression
in Infancy.” Child Development 53, (1982): 991-1003.
Zahn-Waxler, Carolyn, and Marian Radke-Yarrow, et al. “Development of Concern for Others,” Developmental Psychology 28, no. 1, (1992): 126-36.

Emotional intelligence
The ability to perceive and constructively act on
both one’s own emotions and the feelings of others.

The amygdala, a structure of the limbic system (the
behavioral center of the brain) located near the brainstem, is thought to be responsible for emotional learning
and emotional memory. Studies have shown that damage to the amygdala can impair the ability to judge fear
and other emotions in facial expressions (to “read” the
emotions of others), a skill which is critical to effective
social interaction. The amygdala serves as an emotional
scrapbook that the brain refers to in interpreting and reacting to new experiences. It is also associated with emotional arousal.
The ability to understand the thoughts and feelings
of others is also regulated by the prefrontal cortex of the
brain, sometimes called “the executive center.” This
brain structure and its components store emotional memories that an individual draws on when interacting socially. Research studies have demonstrated that individuals
with brain lesions in the prefrontal cortex area have difficulties in social interactions and problem-solving and
tend to make poor choices, probably because they have
lost the ability to access past experiences and emotions.

Applications

Origins
Emotional intelligence (EI) is sometimes referred
to as emotional quotient or emotional literacy. Individuals with emotional intelligence are able to relate to others with compassion and empathy, have well-developed
social skills, and use this emotional awareness to direct
their actions and behavior. The term was coined in 1990
by psychologists John Mayer and Peter Salovey. In
1995, psychologist/journalist Daniel Goleman published
the highly successful Emotional Intelligence, which
built on Mayer and Salovey’s work and popularized the
EI concept.
The four areas of emotional intelligence, as identified by Mayer and Salovey, are as follows:
• Identifying emotions. The ability to recognize one’s
own feelings and the feelings of those around them.
• Using emotions. The ability to access an emotion and
reason with it (use it to assist thought and decisions).
• Understanding emotions. Emotional knowledge; the
ability to identify and comprehend what Mayer and Salovey term “emotional chains”—the transition of one
emotion to another.

The concept of emotional intelligence has found a
number of different applications outside of the psychological research and therapy arenas. Professional, educational, and community institutions have integrated different aspects of the emotional intelligence philosophy into
their organizations to promote more productive working
relationships, better outcomes, and enhanced personal
satisfaction.
In the workplace and in other organizational settings,
the concept of emotional intelligence has spawned an entire industry of EI consultants, testing materials, and
workshops. “People skills,” another buzzword for emotional intelligence, has long been recognized as a valued
attribute in employees. The popularity of the EI concept
in business is easily explained—when employees, managers, and clients have mutually rewarding personal relationships, productivity increases and profits follow.
Educators and youth counselors who work with
children try to help them develop emotional self-awareness and the ability to recognize and positively act on
feelings. Emphasis on emotional intelligence in the
classroom also focuses on problem solving, conflict res-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

217

Emotional intelligence

less likely than girls to disclose their fearful emotions
during times of distress. This reluctance was similarly
supported by boys’ belief that they would receive less
understanding and, in fact, probably be belittled, for expressing both aggressive and vulnerable emotions.

Emotion

olution, empathy, coping, and communication skills, and
is frequently implemented in violence-prevention programs. Self-science, an educational curriculum developed in the 1970s by educator Karen Stone McCown and
psychologist Hal Dillehunt, was an early forerunner of
emotional intelligence. The program, which focused on
developing social and emotional skills to nurture unique
learning styles and life skills, is still in use today.
A number of tests or assessments have been developed to “measure” emotional intelligence, although their
validity is questioned by some researchers. These include the Mayer-Salovey-Caruso Emotional Intelligence
Test (MSCEIT), the Multifactor Emotional Intelligence
Scale (MEIS), the Emotional Competence Inventory 360
(ECI 360), the Work Profile Questionnaire-emotional intelligence version (WPQ-ei), and the Baron Emotional
Quotient Inventory (EQ-i). Other psychometric measures, or tests, such as the Wechsler Intelligence Scale
for Children, Revised (WISC-R), a standard intelligence
test, are sometimes useful in measuring the social aptitude features of emotional intelligence.
Paula Ford-Martin
Further Reading
Goleman, Daniel. Emotional Intelligence. New York: Bantam,
1995.
Mayer, J.D. and P. Salovey. “What Is Emotional Intelligence?”
In Emotional Development, Emotional Literacy, and
Emotional Intelligence: Implications for Educators, edited by P. Salovey and D. Sluyter. New York: Basic Books,
1997.

Further Information
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). 6001 Executive
Boulevard, Rm. 8184, MSC 9663, Bethesda, MD, USA.
20892-9663, fax: (301)443-4279, (301)443-4513. Email:
nimhinfo@nih.gov. http://www.nimh.nih.gov.
6 Seconds. 316 Seville Way, San Mateo, CA, USA. 94402,
(650)685-9885. Email: solutions@6seconds.org.
http://www.6seconds.org.

Emotion
A reaction, both psychological and physical, subjectively experienced as strong feelings, many of
which prepare the body for immediate action.

In contrast to moods, which are generally longerlasting, emotions are transitory, with relatively well-defined beginnings and endings. They also have valence,
meaning that they are either positive or negative. Subjectively, emotions are experienced as passive phenomena.
218

Even though it is possible to exert a measure of control
over one’s emotions, they are not initiated—they happen
to people. Objectively, emotions involve internal physiological responses and expressive outward displays that
are both learned and innate. Certain emotions themselves, considered to be primary emotions—joy, anger,
sadness, fear, and love—are thought to be innate, while
complex emotions—such as altruism, shame, guilt, and
envy—seem to arise from social learning.
The first influential theory of emotion in modern
times—the James-Lange theory—was formulated independently in the 1880s by both American psychologist
and philosopher William James and Danish physiologist
C.G. Lange (1834-1900). Both scientists arrived at the
view that the physiological manifestations of emotion
precede the subjective ones—rather than trembling because we are afraid, we are afraid because we tremble.
Even though the brain responds to a threatening situation
by activating peripheral responses, we do not consciously
experience the emotion until these responses are activated. Thus, the central nervous system itself does not actually produce the emotion. Over the following decades,
this theory drew widespread response and criticism.
An alternative model of emotional experience was
formulated in 1927 by Walter Cannon (1871-1945), who
proposed that emotions do originate in the central nervous system. Cannon argued that nerve impulses first
pass through the thalamus, from which subjective responses are routed through the cerebral cortex, directly
creating the experience of fear at the same time that physiological responses are passing through the hypothalamus. The Cannon-Bard theory, whose name reflects later
modifications by Phillip Bard, thus delineated the psychological and physiological components of emotion as
simultaneous and argued that the experience of emotion
comes directly from the central nervous system. Some
more recent theorists have once again moved closer to the
James-Lange model. The 1962 Schachter-Singer theory
restores James’s emphasis on the interpretation of physiological responses but adds another element—a cognitive
evaluation of what caused the responses. This theory thus
contradicts James’s assertion that emotion is communicated solely on the basis of physical feedback, asserting
that this feedback by itself is not clear enough to specify
a particular emotion. Rather, the brain chooses one of
many possible interpretations and “labels” the feedback
pattern, and it is this labeling that results in the experiencing of a particular emotion.
Areas of the brain that play an important role in the
production of emotions include the reticular formation,
the limbic system, and the cerebral cortex. The reticular
formation, within the brain stem, receives and filters sensory information before passing it on the limbic system

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

crease efficiency levels by making people more alert.
However, intense emotions—either positive or negative—interfere with performance because central nervous system responses are channeled in too many directions at once. The effects of arousal on performance also
depend on the difficulty of the task at hand; emotions interfere less with simple tasks than with more complicated ones.

While the physiological changes associated with
emotions are triggered by the brain, they are carried out
by the endocrine and autonomic nervous systems. In response to fear or anger, for example, the brain signals the
pituitary gland to release a hormone called ACTH, which
in turn causes the adrenal glands to secrete cortisol, another hormone that triggers what is known as the fightor-flight response, a combination of physical changes
that prepare the body for action in dangerous situations.
The heart beats faster, respiration is more rapid, the liver
releases glucose into the bloodstream to supply added
energy, fuels are mobilized from the body’s stored fat,
and the body generally goes into a state of high arousal.
The pupils dilate, perspiration increases while secretion
of saliva and mucous decreases, hairs on the body become erect, causing “goose pimples,” and the digestive
system slows down as blood is diverted to the brain and
skeletal muscles. These changes are carried out with the
aid of the sympathetic nervous system, one of two divisions of the autonomic nervous system. When the crisis
is over, the parasympathetic nervous system, which conserves the body’s energy and resources, returns things to
their normal state.

Further Reading

Ways of expressing emotion may be either innate or
culturally acquired. Certain facial expressions, such as
smiling, have been found to be universal, even among
blind persons, who have no means of imitating them.
Other expressions vary across cultures. For example, the
Chinese stick out their tongues to register surprise, in
contrast to Americans and other Westerners, who raise
their eyebrows and widen their eyes. In addition to the
ways of communicating various emotions, people within
a culture also learn certain unwritten codes governing
emotional expression itself—what emotions can be
openly expressed and under what circumstances. Cultural forces also influence how people describe and categorize what they are feeling. An emotion that is commonly
recognized in one society may be subsumed under another emotion in a different one. Some cultures, for example, do not distinguish between anger and sadness.
Tahitians, who have no word for either sadness or guilt,
have 46 words for various types of anger.
In daily life, emotional arousal may have beneficial
or disruptive effects, depending on the situation and the
intensity of the emotion. Moderate levels of arousal in-

Powell, Barbara. The Complete Guide to Your Child’s Emotional Health. Danbury, CT: F. Watts, 1984.
Your Child’s Emotional Health: Adolescence. New York:
Macmillan, 1994.

Empathy
The capacity to vicariously experience and understand the thoughts and feelings of another person
by putting oneself in that person’s place.

While most forms of psychotherapy require some
degree of empathy on the part of the counselor or therapist, the client-centered therapy pioneered by Carl
Rogers places particular emphasis on this quality as part
of the therapeutic experience. Instead of looking at the
client from outside (external frame of reference), the
client-centered therapist attempts to see things as they
actually look to the client (internal frame of reference).
Throughout each therapy session, the therapist demonstrates what Rogers termed “accurate empathetic understanding,” showing sensitivity to the client’s feelings
through active listening that shows careful and perceptive attention to what the client is saying. The therapist
employs standard behaviors common to all good listeners, making frequent eye contact with the client, nodding
in agreement or understanding, and generally showing
that he or she is listening attentively.
One unique way client-centered therapists demonstrate empathy with the client is through a special
method called reflection, which consists of paraphrasing
and/or summarizing what a client has just said. This
technique lets therapists check the accuracy of their perceptions while showing clients that they are paying careful attention to and are interested in what is being said.
Hearing their own thoughts and feelings repeated by another person can also help clients achieve new levels of
insight and self-awareness. Clients generally respond to
reflection by elaborating further on the thoughts they
have just expressed. Empathy constitutes a major portion
of the therapeutic work in client-centered therapy. By
helping clients feel better about themselves, it gives

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

219

Empathy

and cortex. The limbic system includes the hypothalamus,
which produces most of the peripheral responses to emotion through its control of the endocrine and autonomic
nervous systems; the amygdala, which is associated with
fear and aggressive behavior; the hippocampus; and parts
of the thalamus. The frontal lobes of the cerebral cortex
receive nerve impulses from the thalamus and play an active role in the experience and expression of emotions.

Empiricism

them the self-confidence and energy to deal actively with
their problems.

clude that it is outside the realm of science, even though
it may be vitally important in some other realm.

Further Reading

Further Reading

Rogers, Carl. Client-Centered Therapy. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1951.
———. On Becoming a Person. Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1961.
———. A Way of Being. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1980.

Carruthers, Peter. Human Knowledge and Human Nature: A
New Introduction to an Ancient Debate. Oxford, Eng.:
Oxford University Press, 1992.
Grossmann, Reinhardt. The Fourth Way: A Theory of Knowledge. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1990.

Empiricism

Encounter group

Type of research that is based on direct observation.

Group of individuals who engage in intensive and
psychotherapeutic verbal and nonverbal interaction, with the general intention of increasing
awareness of self and sensitivity to others, and improving interpersonal skills.

Psychologists prefer to learn about behavior through
direct observation or experience. This approach reflects
what is called empiricism. Psychologists are well-known
for creating experiments, conducting interviews and
using surveys, and carrying out case studies. The common feature of these approaches is that psychologists
wait until observations are made before they draw any
conclusions about the behaviors they are interested in.
Scientists often maintain that empiricism fosters
healthy skepticism. By this they mean that they will not
regard something as being true until they have made the
observations themselves. Such an approach means that
science can be self-correcting in the sense that when erroneous conclusions are drawn, others can test the original ideas to see if they are correct.
Empiricism is one of the hallmarks of any scientific
endeavor. Other disciplines employ different approaches
to gaining knowledge. For example, many philosophers
use the a priori method rather than the empirical
method. In the a priori method, one uses strictly rational,
logical arguments to derive knowledge. Geometric
proofs are an example of the use of the a priori method.
In everyday life, people accept ideas as being true or
false based on authority or on intuition. In many cases,
people hold beliefs because individuals who are experts
have made pronouncements on some topic. For example,
in religious matters, many people rely on the advice and
guidance of their religious leaders in deciding on the correct way to lead their lives. Further, we often believe
things because they seem intuitively obvious. Relying on
authority and intuition may be very useful in some aspects
of our lives, like those involving questions of morality.
Scientists prefer the empirical method in their work,
however, because the topics of science lend themselves
to observation and measurement. When something cannot be observed or measured, scientists are likely to con220

Encounter groups are formed, usually under the
guidance and leadership of a psychologists or therapist,
to provide an environment for intensive interaction. In
general, because the therapy takes place in a group setting, one of the goals of the encounter group is to improve the participants’ interpersonal skills. A typical encounter group may consist of fewer that ten persons, one
of whom is a trained specialist, or leader. The role of the
leader is primarily to develop and maintain an atmosphere of psychological safety conducive to the free and
honest expression of the ideas of group members. The
leader remains, as much as possible, outside the actual
discussion itself. Encounter group members are encouraged to fully examine and explore their reactions to, and
feelings about, statements made, and issues raised, in the
group. Proponents of the encounter group form of psychotherapy tend to believe that the behavior of an individual is shaped to a very large degree by responsive
adaptation to the attitudes of other individuals, and that
encounter groups enable individuals to discover and
modify behavior that is perceived as inappropriate. The
effectiveness of encounter groups is a matter of some
dispute, and there is evidence which suggests that certain
behavioral and attitudinal changes accomplished inside
the group may not endure outside the group. Although
early versions of encounter groups may have existed
near the beginning of the 20th century, the encounter
group technique as it is currently practiced is derived
from sensitivity training procedures introduced shortly
after World War II. Both the encounter group and sensitivity training techniques are now generally included in a
wider array of techniques, some of which are controversial in the field of psychology, that were popularized beginning in the 1960s. These techniques are collectively
referred to as the human potential movement.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Environment

This encounter group for overeaters encourages members to express themselves freely and honestly. (Photo by Carolyn A.
McKeone. Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

Further Reading
Appelbaum, Stephen. Out in Inner Space. Garden City, NY:
Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1970.

Endocrine glands
Ductless glands which secrete chemical substances
called hormones into the bloodstream which control the internal environment not only of each cell
and organ, but of the entire body.

The endocrine glands—the pineal, pituitary, thyroid,
parathyroids, thymus, adrenals, pancreas and gonads
(ovaries or testes)—comprise the endocrine system. The
hypothalamus, the gland in the brain which serves as
the command center, operates the endocrine system
through the pituitary, a pea-sized gland located under it,
which directs the work of all the other glands. The thyroid, a gland in the neck, regulates the body’s metabolism. The parathyroids, which are attached to the thyroid,
control the amount of calcium and phosphate in the
bloodstream. The adrenal glands, located near the kid-

neys, produce adrenaline which arouses the body to respond to stress and emergencies and other hormones active in carbohydrate metabolism. The pancreas secretes
insulin which regulates the level of sugar in the bloodstream. The gonads regulate sexual development, ovulation, and growth of sex organs.
Further Reading
The Endocrine System: Miraculous Messengers. New York:
Torstar Books, 1985.

Environment
The combination of physical, social, and cultural
conditions that influence an individual’s development and behavior.

The relative importance of heredity and environment in shaping human lives—nature versus nurture—
has long been a topic of debate taken up by thinkers as
diverse as John Locke, Charles Darwin, and Sigmund
Freud, and forms part of current policy debates in areas

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

221

Environment

behavior taking a middle position that emphasizes the
interaction between biological predispositions and life
experiences.

Cross-section of a human adrenal gland, one of the
endocrine glands. (Photo by Martin M. Rotker. Phototake NYC.
Reproduced with permission.)

such as crime and education. Traditionally, this controversy pits those who believe that human nature and intelligence are biologically determined (eugenicists) against
those who contend that, given a positive and enriching
environment, most individuals have the potential for
high levels of human development (euthenists). It is
agreed that such human characteristics as sex, height,
skin and hair color, and, to a certain extent, temperament, are genetically determined at conception. However, there is disagreement over the extent to which other
aspects of human development—including behavior,
personality, and intelligence—are influenced by such
environmental factors as nutrition, emotional climate of
the home, and quality of stimulation and parental feedback. In addition to the immediate family, many experts
consider the social class and culture in which a child is
raised as important environmental factors in determining
his or her development.
Intelligence testing and race has resurfaced as a
volatile topic in the nature/nurture debate, since
African-Americans as a group score 10 to 15 points
lower on standard IQ tests than whites. Some experts
claim that this disparity demonstrates the differences in
inherited ability among the two races, while others attribute the gap to environmental influences. In 1994,
Richard Herrnstein and Charles Murray published The
Bell Curve, in which they asserted that low-income
blacks have innately lower cognitive abilities than
whites (based on the gap in IQ scores), a situation that
cannot be significantly remedied through government
social and educational programs. Many social scientists, however, consider environmental and genetic factors to be so closely intertwined as to make it impossible to clearly separate them. Thus, the contrasting positions of eugenicists and euthenists are actually at opposite ends of a continuum, with most observers of human
222

Social learning theorists refer to another layer of
complexity in the relationship between environment
and human behavior: the self-generated environment.
This concept refers to the fact that a certain behavior
or behaviors may produce environmental conditions
that can affect future behavior. People who behave in
an abrasive manner, for example, help create a hostile
social environment, which in turn leads to further hostility on their part. Similarly, the behavior of friendly
persons will tend to generate a supportive environment
that reinforces and perpetuates their original behavior.
Thus, a group of persons who find themselves in the
same “potential environment” may experience different “actual environments” as a result of their contrasting behaviors.
Since the 1960s, environmental psychologists have
studied the relationship between human behavior and
the physical environment, including noise, pollution,
and architectural design. Like ethologists, who study
animal behavior in their natural habitat, environmental
psychologists maintain a holistic view of human behavior that leads them to study it in its natural setting rather
than in a laboratory, or at least to supplement laboratory
experiments with field research. Environmental psychologists study such topics as the ways in which the architectural design of a psychiatric hospital affects its patients; the effects of aircraft noise on children at a
school near an airport; and overcrowding in a college
dormitory.
Environment psychology is basically an applied
field geared toward solving specific problems rather than
a theoretical area of study. Like social learning theory,
it is heavily concerned with the reciprocal relationship
between behavior and environment, including the ways
in which people cope with their physical surroundings
by altering them. One exception to this orientation is a
position known as determinism, which has influenced
much research into the effects of architecture on behavior. The determinist approach emphasizes the adaptation of people to their surroundings, and considers behavior largely as a function of those surroundings, with
little reciprocity involved.
See also Eugenics; Jensen, Arthur
Further Reading
Altman, Irwin. The Environment and Social Behavior: Privacy,
Personal Space, Territory, Crowding. Monterey, CA:
Brooks/Cole, 1975.
Gray, Jeffrey Alan. The Psychology of Fear and Stress. 2nd ed.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Epilepsy

Epilepsy
A condition affecting people regardless of age, sex,
or race, where a pattern of recurring malfunctioning of the brain is present.

Epilepsy, from the Greek word for seizure, is a recurrent demonstration of a brain malfunction. The outward signs of epilepsy may range from only a slight
smacking of the lips or staring into space to a generalized convulsion. It is a condition that can affect anyone
of any age, sex, or race.
The number of people with epilepsy is not known.
Some authorities say that up to 0.5% of the population
are epileptic, but others believe this estimate is too low.
Many cases of epilepsy, particularly those with very subtle symptoms, are not reported. The most serious form of
epilepsy is not considered an inherited condition, though
parents with epilepsy are more prone to have children
with the disease. On the other hand, an epileptic child
may have parents who show no sign of the condition,
though they will have some abnormal brain waves.
Though the cause of epilepsy remains unknown, the
manner in which the condition is demonstrated indicates
the area of the brain that is affected. Jacksonian seizures,
for example, which are localized twitching of muscles,
originate in the frontal lobe of the brain in the motor cortex. A localized numbness or tingling indicates an origin
in the parietal lobe on the side of the brain in the sensory
cortex.
The recurrent symptoms, then, are the result of localized, excessive activity of brain cells or neurons.
These can be seen on the standard brain test called the
electroencephalogram (EEG). For this test electrodes are
applied to specific areas of the head to pick up the electrical waves generated by the brain. If the patient experiences an epileptic episode while wired to the EEG, the
abnormal brain waves can easily be seen and the determination made as to their origin in the brain. Usually the
patient does not experience a seizure and no abnormalities are found.
Grand mal seizures are those that are most characteristic of epilepsy. Immediately prior to the seizure, the
patient may have some indication that a seizure is imminent. This feeling is called an aura. Very soon after experiencing the aura the patient will lapse into unconsciousness and experience clonic seizures, which are generalized muscle contractions that may distort the body position. Thrashing movements of the limbs shortly ensue
and are caused by opposing sets of muscles alternating in
contractions (hence, the other name for grand mal
seizures: tonic-clonic seizures). The patient may also

This patient’s brain is exposed during surgery in order for
surgeons to remove the mass responsible of his epilepsy.
(Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced with permission.)

lose bladder control. When the seizures cease, usually
after three to five minutes, the patient may remain unconscious for up to half an hour. Upon waking, he or she
may not remember having had a seizure and may be confused for a time.
In contrast to the drama of the grand mal seizure, the
petit mal may seem inconsequential. The patient interrupts whatever he or she is doing and for up to about 30
seconds may show subtle outward signs such as blinking
eyes, staring into space, or pausing in conversation. After
the seizure previous activities are resumed. Petit mal
seizures are associated with heredity, and they never
occur in people over the age of 20 years. Oddly, though
the seizures may occur several times a day, they do so
usually when the patient is quiet and not during periods
of activity. After puberty these seizures may disappear or
they may be replaced by the grand mal type of seizure.
A serious form of seizure, status epilepticus, indicates a state in which grand mal seizures occur in rapid
succession with no period of recovery between them.
This can be a life-threatening event because the patient
has difficulty breathing and may experience a dangerous
rise in blood pressure. This form of seizure is very rare,
but it can be brought on if someone abruptly stops taking
medication prescribed for the epilepsy. It may also occur
during alcohol withdrawal.
A number of drugs are available for the treatment of
epilepsy. The oldest is phenobarbital, which has the un-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

223

Equilibrium sense

fortunate side effect of being addictive. Other commonly
used drugs include phenytoin, carbamazepine, and sodium valproate. All have the possibility of causing such
undesirable side effects as drowsiness, nausea, or dizziness. Several new drugs are being studied to determine
their efficacy and safety.
The epileptic patient needs to be protected from
self-injury during an attack. Usually for the patient having a petit mal seizure, little needs to be done. Occasionally these individuals may lose their balance and need to
be helped to the ground to avoid hitting their heads, but
otherwise need little attention. The individual in a grand
mal seizure should not be restrained, but may need some
help to avoid striking his limbs or head on the floor or
nearby obstruction. If possible, the patient should be
rolled onto his side. This will maintain an open airway
for breathing by allowing the tongue to fall to one side.
Epilepsy can be a recurrent, lifelong condition.
Medication can control seizures in a substantial percentage of patients, perhaps up to 85% of those with grand
mal manifestations. Some patients will experience
seizures even with maximum dosages of medication, and
these individuals need to wear an identification bracelet
to let others know of their condition.
Further Reading
Glanz, J. “Do Chaos-Control Techniques Offer Hope for
Epilepsy?” Science 265, (August 26, 1994): 1174.

The semicircular canals are three pretzel-like curved
tubes arranged at angles roughly perpendicular to each
other, with the two vestibular sacs located at their base.
Both the canals and sacs contain fluid and tiny hair cells,
which act as receptors. When a person’s head moves, the
fluid disturbs the hair cells, which stimulate a branch of
the auditory nerve, signaling the brain to make adjustments in the eyes and body. A movement at any given
angle will have its primary effect on one of the three
canals. Overstimulation from extreme movements will
produce dizziness and nausea. Our sense of body position when we are at rest is provided by the vestibular
sacs, which contain small crystals called otoliths (literally, “ear stones”) that exert pressure on the hair cells. In
their normal position, the otoliths inform our brains that
we are standing or sitting upright. When the head is tilted, the position of the otoliths changes, and the signal
sent to the brain changes accordingly. The neural connections of the vestibular system lead to the cerebellum,
the eye muscles, and a part of the autonomic nervous
system involved in digestion (which accounts for the
link between dizziness and nausea).
Further Reading
Burke, Shirley R. Human Anatomy and Physiology in Health
and Disease. New York: Delmar, 1992.
Martini, Frederic. Fundamentals of Anatomy and Physiology.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1995.

Further Information
American Epilepsy Foundation. 638 Prospect Avenue, Hartford, CT 06105–2498, (203) 232–4825.
Epilepsy Foundation of America. 4351 Garden City Drive,
Landover, MD 20785, (800) 332–1000.

Erik Erikson
1902-1979
German-born American psychoanalyst best known
for his work with children and adolescents.

Equilibrium sense
One of two proprioceptive sensory systems that
provide us with input about the positions of our
own bodies.

The equilibrium sense, generally associated with
balance, provides feedback about the positions and
movements of our heads and bodies in space. The other
system—the kinesthetic sense—tells us about the orientation of different parts of our bodies in relation to each
other. While the kinesthetic information needed by the
brain comes from joints and muscle fibers throughout
the body, the receptors for equilibrium are located in the
semicircular canals and vestibular sacs of the inner ear.
(The equilibrium sense is also called the vestibular
sense, and the relevant parts of the inner ear are sometimes called the vestibular system or apparatus).
224

Erik Erikson was born in Frankfurt, Germany, to
Danish parents. As a youth, he was a student and teacher
of art. While teaching at a private school in Vienna, he became acquainted with Anna Freud, the daughter of Sigmund Freud. Erikson underwent psychoanalysis, and
the experience made him decide to become an analyst
himself. He was trained in psychoanalysis at the Vienna
Psychoanalytic Institute and also studied the Montessori
method of education, which focused on child development. Following Erikson’s graduation from the Vienna
Psychoanalytic Institute in 1933, the Nazis had just come
to power in Germany, and he emigrated with his wife,
first to Denmark and then to the United States, where he
became the first child psychoanalyst in Boston. Erikson
held positions at Massachusetts General Hospital, the
Judge Baker Guidance Center, and at Harvard’s Medical
School and Psychological Clinic, establishing a solid reputation as an outstanding clinician. In 1936, Erikson ac-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Erik Erikson

cepted a position at Yale University, where he worked at
the Institute of Human Relations and taught at the Medical School. After spending a year observing children on
a Sioux reservation in South Dakota, he joined the faculty
of the University of California at Berkeley, where he was
affiliated with the Institute of Child Welfare, and opened
a private practice as well. While in California, Erikson
also studied children of the Yurok Native American tribe.
After publishing the book for which he is best known,
Childhood and Society, in 1950, he left Berkeley to join
the staff of the Austen Riggs Center, a prominent psychiatric treatment facility in Stockbridge, Massachusetts,
where he worked with emotionally troubled young people. In the 1960s, Erikson returned to Harvard as a professor of human development and remained at the university until his retirement in 1970.
Much of Erikson’s work is concerned with the formation of individual identity, the creative operation of
consciousness in a well-adjusted personality, and societal influences on child development. He differs from
more traditional Freudians by assigning a significantly
greater importance to development after the first few
years of life, and by arguing that the ego plays a highly
positive role in that development. Erikson is also noted
for the illumination of his concept of the adolescent
“identity crisis,” a term which he coined. Erikson’s theory of personality covers the entire human lifespan, which
he divides into eight distinct stages, each with its own
tasks and crisis. In infancy, the basic conflict is between
trust and mistrust. A sense of trust is established according to the quality of the infant’s relationship with its
care-givers. Achievement of trust is considered especially important for development in the following stages.
The crisis in early childhood, the next stage, is between
the child’s need for autonomy and the sense of doubt and
shame brought on by learning to deal with rules and social demands for self-control, including physical control
such as toilet training. Successfully negotiated, this stage
leads to the emergence of independence and will power.
Later in the preschool period comes the third stage,
when the child begins to actively explore his or her environment. At this stage, there is a crisis over initiative
and a possible sense of guilt about asserting control over
his or her own activities. A sense of purpose, leading to
the ability to pursue goals in spite of risks and possible
failure, emerges with the resolution of this conflict. During the fourth stage, the early school years, the social
context expands to include the school environment,
where skills and mastery of tasks become a primary
focus of attention. A conflict arises between industry, or
the ability to work, and feelings of inferiority, and the
former must triumph in order for the development of
competence.

Erik Erikson (Archive Photos, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

The goals of the first four stages—trust, autonomy,
initiative, and industry—create the foundation for the
successful negotiation of the fifth stage, in which the
adolescent must form a stable identity and achieve a
sense of self. While social issues such as “fitting in with
the group” are important at this point, Erikson emphasizes the importance of achieving an individual identity
based on self-knowledge and continuity of experience.
Failure to resolve the conflicts of this stage results in
identity or role confusion and affects the experiences of
the three adult stages which follow. In young adulthood,
the primary issue is intimacy, or the ability to love. In
middle adulthood, it is generativity, or the ability to be
productive, whether in work, parenting, or other activities, rather than stagnating. The key quality at this stage
is the ability to care for others. Finally, at maturity, the
challenge is to achieve a sense of integrity and wisdom
with which to overcome despair over physical disintegration and death.
Erikson’s mapping of the life cycle has had a profound impact on developmental psychology, especially
in the area of adolescent behavior and in the shift to a
life-span perspective among students of human development. He won both the Pulitzer Prize and the National
Book Award for his writings, which include the psychobi-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

225

Ethics

ographies Young Man Luther (1958) and Gandhi’s Truth
(1969). Erikson is also the author of Insight and Responsibility (1964) and Identity, Youth, and Crisis (1968).
See also Adolescence
Further Reading
Coles, Robert. Erik H. Erikson: The Growth of His Work.
Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1970.

Ethics
Personal rules for behavior.

Ethics are rules for behavior, based on beliefs about
how things should be. Ethical statements involve: 1) assumptions about humans and their capacities; 2) logical
rules extending from these assumptions; and 3) notions
of what is good and desirable.
Ethical systems (sets of rules for acceptable behavior)
concern the “shoulds” and “should nots” of life, the principles and values on which human relations are based.
The assessment of whether a behavior is ethical is divided into four categories, or domains: consequences, actions, character, and motive. In the domain of consequences, a behavior is determined to be “right” or
“wrong” based on the results of the action, whereas the
domain of actions looks only at the act itself. The domain
of character looks at whether a person’s overall character
is ethical; a person who is deemed as “virtuous” has consistently ethical behavior. The motive domain evaluates a
person’s intentions, regardless of the consequences. It
considers whether the person intended to do good, even if
the result was bad. A behavior may be deemed “ethical”
according to one domain of assessment, but appear “unethical” according to another. For example, a poor person
steals a small amount of food to feed her starving child
from a wealthy, well-fed person who does not even notice
that the food is missing. This act would be considered
ethical in the domain of consequences, since the child can
be fed, and motive, since the person is caring for her
child, but unethical in the domain of actions, because
stealing in itself is wrong. The poor person’s general behavior would have to be evaluated to determine whether
she is ethical in the domain of character.
Ethics can also be divided into two main schools,
absolutism and relativism. Absolutists believe that ethical rules are fixed standards (for example, stealing is always wrong, no matter what the circumstances). Relativists, on the other hand, believe that all ethics are subject to context (for example, stealing may be wrong in
certain circumstances but not in others). Few people are
226

actually pure absolutists or pure relativists, but rather fall
somewhere along the spectrum between the two extremes, tending towards one or the other. Most who tend
towards absolutism will allow for special circumstances
and bend the rules on occasion, while those who tend towards relativism will admit to some universal standards
that form a “bottom line” of behavior.
In order to develop ethical maturity, people must
have moral awareness and moral agency (or autonomy).
Moral awareness is the ability to recognize the ethical
element of a given situation. For some, eating beef is
simply an act of appetite and habit, with no thought
given to its ethical implications. For others, whether to
eat beef is a complicated moral question involving the
ethics of land use (grazing cattle vs. growing food
crops), conservation (the destruction of rainforests to increase grazing grounds), and the global economy (the
transformation of underdeveloped countries into cattle
farms for Western industrialized nations). Moral agency
or autonomy means the freedom to choose between alternative behaviors. A person cannot develop ethical maturity without being able to choose from alternatives.
Without moral awareness and moral agency, ethics become meaningless because behaviors are simply automatic, or forced.
The question of moral agency becomes complicated
by the tendency to equate ethical behavior with obedience. Because humans first learn ethics as small children
from adult authority figures, our initial understanding of
ethics is “obeying.” When we do what adults want us to,
we are told we are “good.” If we disobey, we are “bad.”
Some people never outgrow this, continuing throughout
life to believe that being “good” means obeying external
authorities. These people have never developed a sense of
moral agency, even though they are capable of making
choices. A prime example of this dilemma is the numerous soldiers and citizens who carried out or assisted in the
torture and murder of millions of Jews, Russians, gays,
and others in the Holocaust of World War II. Do their
claims that they were “just following orders” exempt
them from ethical responsibility? Likewise, in situations
of oppression where people have been traumatized into
blind obedience to their oppressors, are the oppressed
ethically responsible for their actions, or do they lack
moral agency? These are difficult questions with no clear
answers, but they do illuminate the essential character of
freedom to choose in the development of ethical maturity.
Ethical maturity involves accepting full responsibility for one’s ethical choices and their consequences. An
ethically mature person obeys her or his own, inner authority (or conscience), rather than an outside authority
figure. Moving from the infantile state of externally determined obedience to the mature state of self-determi-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

• Stage 1 = The person sees the world in polar terms of
we-right-good versus they-wrong-bad. Right answers
for everything are known to an authority whose role is
to mediate or teach them.
• Stage 2 = The person perceives diversity of opinion and
uncertainty and accounts for these as confusion engendered by poorly qualified authorities or as exercises designed to encourage individuals to find their own system.

and “wrong” return, not as absolutes as in the first three
stages, but as contextual concepts.
The next steps in ethical maturity involve taking responsibility for one’s own ethical choices, leading eventually to a solid, well-reasoned, ethical self-determination.
• Stage 6 = The person recognizes that he or she must orient himself or herself in a relativistic world through a
personal commitment, as distinct from unquestioned or
unconsidered commitment to simple belief in certainty.
• Stage 7 = The person makes an initial, limited commitment.

• Stage 3 = The person accepts diversity and uncertainty
as legitimate, but only as temporary conditions in areas
for which the authority has not yet found an answer.
The perceived uncertainty on the part of the so-called
experts makes the person anxious. Therefore, this stage
does not last long.

• Stage 8 = The person experiences the initial implications of commitment and explores the subjective issues
of responsibility.

In Stages 1-3, ethical choices are based completely
on obedience to external authorities. A person in these
stages of ethical development is rigid in their beliefs and
defensive when challenged, because there is no internal
sense of confidence. The person’s ethics are not grounded in any self-determined understanding of right and
wrong, but rather in the dictates of outside authorities.
When the infallibility of those authorities comes into
question, the anxiety produced either pushes the person
on to Stage 4, or back to the unquestioning stance of
Stage 1. Some people never progress beyond the first
three stages of ethical development.

The ethically mature person understands that ethical
maturity is not a final achievement but a lifelong process
of growth and development.

The biggest shift in ethical understanding comes between Stages 3 and 4, if the person chooses to progress
rather than regress. At this point, blind obedience to absolute, externally determined codes of behavior is
thrown off and replaced with extreme relativism. As the
person matures further, this extreme relativism is gradually modified. In McGrath’s words:
• Stage 4 = The person perceives that legitimate uncertainty and diversity of opinion are extensive and concludes that all people have a right to their own opinions. The person rejects ethical authorities in favor of a
thoroughgoing relativism in which anyone’s opinion,
including the individual’s, is as good, true, or reliable
as anyone else’s.
• Stage 5 = The person perceives all knowledge and values, including those of formerly recognized ethical authorities, as contextual and relativistic and relegates dualistic right-wrong functions to a subordinate status by
placing them in context.
In other words, Stage 4 reasoning makes “right” and
“wrong” meaningless with a completely relativistic, anything-goes ethical stance. In Stage 5, however, “right”

• Stage 9 = The person assumes responsibility for his or
her beliefs and realizes that commitment is an ongoing,
unfolding activity.

Ethics are acquired from the day of our birth until
the day of our death. At first, ethics are absorbed through
parent-child relationships and the imitation of adult
behavior. Children should interact with warm, caring,
ethically mature adults during their first years of life to
promote positive ethical development. Parents and teachers have a strong impact on children through the tenor of
their relationships with children and with each other.
Adults most often try to promote ethical behavior in children by establishing rules and codes of behavior through
rewards and punishments. However, experts have found
that this is much less effective than modeling and personal interaction.
Ethics are also acquired through labeling and sexual
roles. People most often live up to the labels they are
given, especially children. If a child is labeled “delinquent,” she or he will incorporate that label and behave
accordingly. If, on the other hand, a child is labeled
“well-behaved,” he or she will fulfill that expectation.
Sexual roles also confer labels; “masculine” and “feminine” carry distinct expectations in nearly every culture,
which children learn to conform to or rebel against early
on. To become ethically mature, a person must struggle
past assigned labels and roles to develop a freely chosen
sense of identity, from which will grow the ethical code.
Two other important sources of ethical development
are the practice of ethical behaviors and social interaction. Adults can help promote positive ethical development in children by creating opportunities for the children to make age-appropriate ethical choices and experience the consequences of those choices. It is also impor-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

227

Ethics

nation is a long and difficult process, however. In her
1994 book, psychologist Elizabeth McGrath presents
nine stages of ethical development.

Ethnic identity

tant to create a safe, supportive social environment so
that children can learn to value others and identify with
their community. Empathy is an essential element in
positive ethical behavior; unless a person identifies with
others and values them, she or he will have no qualms
about causing others pain or suffering.
Finally, to reach full ethical maturity, a person must
create his or her own ethical systems, born out of a sense
of connection with all humans and other forms of life.
Children must be given the opportunity to ground themselves in a sense of safety and community, out of which
they can develop a responsible code of ethics that will
carry them creatively through life.
See also Moral development
Dianne K. Daeg de Mott
Further Reading
McGrath, Elizabeth Z. The Art of Ethics: A Psychology of Ethical Beliefs. Chicago: Loyola University Press, 1994.
Messerly, John G. An Introduction to Ethical Theories. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1995.
Pojman, Louis P. Ethics: Discovering Right and Wrong. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing, 1990.
Terkel, Susan Neiburg. Ethics. New York: Lodestar Books,
1992.

Ethnic identity
An individual’s feeling of belonging to a particular
ethnic group.

The adjective ethnic is derived from the Greek noun
ethnos, which means race, people, nation, and tribe. Although the modern term has a narrower connotation, denoting primarily people, vestiges of the older, more inclusive meaning still remain, particularly in types of discourse where the concepts of race and nationality are
used interchangeably. Matters get even more complicated when the concept of identity is introduced, because,
strictly speaking, a person’s identity is a sum of essential
attributes, and ethnicity, as researchers have asserted, is
not necessarily an essential attribute of personal identity.
As a person matures, his or her perception of ethnicity undergoes a profound transformation. This transformation is concomitant with cognitive development. For
example, as Frances Aboud and Anna-Beth Doyle explain
(Aboud and Doyle, 1983), in the stage of cognitive development which Jean Piaget named pre-operational (between the ages of 2 and 7), children show a strong tendency to identify with a group perceived as their own,
228

Participating in traditional activities helps this little girl
develop a sense of ethnic identity. (Corbis/Nik Wheeler.
Reproduced with permission.)

while rejecting those seen as different. With the onset of
the operation phase, children, who are now capable of rational thought, generally grow more tolerant toward “others,” also showing empathy and understanding toward
children who are viewed as different. This finding shows
that the development of ethnic consciousness, although
related to cognitive development, does not mirror the
child’s intellectual growth. However, with cognitive maturation, ethnicity, which is initially experienced as an
image, or a set of physical attributes, becomes a mental
construct which includes language, customs, cultural
facts, and general knowledge about one’s own ethnic
group. Thus, to a four-year-old Mexican American child,
ethnic identity is formed on the basis of his or her recognition of certain physical traits (Bernal, Knight, Ocampo,
Garza, Cota, 1993). Later, as the person becomes aware
of ethnicity as an idea, ethnic identity is experienced as
an inner quality, or, as Aboud and Skerry note in a study
that compared ethnic self-perception in kindergarten, second grade, and university students (Aboud and Skerry,
1983), internal attributes replace external attributes as the
determinants of ethnic identity.
A strong sense of ethnic identity can influence a
person’s self-esteem, and it can also lead to dangerous,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Zoran Minderovic
Further Reading
Aboud, Frances E., and Anna-Beth Doyle. “The Early Development of Ethnic Identity and Attitudes.” In Ethnic Identity: Formation and Transmission among Hispanics and
Other Minorities, edited by Martha Bernal and George P.
Knight. Albany: State University of New York Press,
(1993): 47-59.
Aboud, Frances E., and Shelagh A. Skerry. “Self and Ethnic
Concepts in Relation to Ethnic Constancy.” Canadian
Journal of Behavioural Science 15, no. 1, (1983): 14-26.
Alba, Richard D. Ethnic Identity: The Transformation of White
America. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990.
Bernal, Martha E., George P. Knight, Katheryn A. Ocampo,
Camille A. Garza, and Marya K. Cota. Ethnic Identity:
Formation and Transmission among Hispanics and Other
Minorities. Albany: State University of New York Press,
1993.
Erikson, Erik. Identity, Youth and Crisis. New York: W.W. Norton, 1968.
———. Identity and the Life Cycle. New York: W.W. Norton,
1980.
Hall, Thomas D., Christopher Bartalos, Elizabeth Mannebach,
and Thomas Perkowitz. “Varieties of Ethnic Conflict in
Global Perspective: A Review Essay.” Social Science
Quarterly 77, no. 2, (June 1966): 445-52.
Ocampo, Katheryn A., Martha E. Bernal, and George P.
Knight. “Gender, Race, and Ethnicity: The Sequencing of
Social Constancies.” In Ethnic Identity: Formation and
Transmission among Hispanics and Other Minorities,
edited by Martha Bernal and George P. Knight. Albany:
State University of New York Press, 1993, pp. 11-30.

times used as a synonym of the term ethnocentrism, although sociocentrism is defined more narrowly. Sociocentrism involves the smaller social group rather than the
larger ethnic group of the individual. Ethnic groups consist of individuals who are bound together, often closely,
by a shared cultural structure and sense of ethnic identity. The central and defining feature of an ethnic group
may be racial, religious, geopolitical, linguistic, traditional, tribal, or some combination of these or other characteristics. An ethnic group may be a majority or a minority of a population, and may be relatively dominant or
powerless in a society. In varying degrees, ethnocentrism
is an attribute of ethnic groups, past and present,
throughout the world. The ethnocentric view that other
ethnic groups and their members are inferior may be expressed in a number of ways: for example, through prejudice, paternalism, contempt, or hate crimes or other
acts of violence.
Further Reading
Forbes, H. D. Nationalism, Ethnocentrism, and Personality.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985.

Ethology
The study of animal behavior as observed in the
natural environment and in the context of evolutionary adaptation.

An attitude of superiority about the ethnic group
with which one is identified.

The pioneering work of Konrad Lorenz and Niko
Tinbergen in the 1930s established a theoretical foundation for ethology, which has had an effect on such wideranging disciplines as genetics, anthropology, and political science in addition to psychology. Ethologists believe
that an animal must be studied on its own terms rather
than primarily in relation to human beings, with a focus
on its normal behavior and environment. They study
animal behavior from the dual perspective of both “proximate explanations” (which concern the individual lifetime of an animal) and “ultimate explanations” (which
concern an animal’s phylogenetic past). Proximate explanations answer questions about how a specific behavior occurs; ultimate explanations answer questions about
why a behavior occurs.

Ethnocentrism is a general belief that the ethnic
group with which an individual is identified is superior
to all other ethnic groups. Consequently, the individual
persistently uses membership in the ethnic group as a
primary criterion in the formation of relationships with
others, and in evaluating or making judgments concerning other individuals. The term sociocentrism is some-

Much of the field work performed by ethologists is
based on the notion that an animal’s behavior is generally
adapted to its environment in much the same way as its
physical characteristics. From the ethologist’s point of
view, a laboratory environment constrains animal behavior too much to provide a true understanding of its full
range of functions and activities. However, the field work
of ethologists consists of more than mere passive obser-

Ethnocentrism

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

229

Ethology

potentially violent, delusions, such as the idea of the “superiority” of a particular race (e.g., the Nazi myth of an
“Aryan” race) or an ethnic group justifying genocide.
For some people ethnic identity is a barely acknowledged fact of their life, while for some, it influences how
they dress, speak, where they attend school, what they
eat, and who they marry.

Etiology

vation of animals in their natural habitats. In order to
make observations about the behavior of an animal in its
environment, ethologists often modify that environment.
In a now-classic experiment, Lorenz managed to substitute himself for a mother goose, whose goslings then proceeded to follow him in single file wherever he went. In
another well-known experiment, Tinbergen conducted a
study of ground-nesting black-headed gulls to explain
why a mother gull removes all traces of eggshell from its
nest after a chick hatches. He hypothesized that the
eggshell might be removed to prevent injuries, disease, or
the attention of predatory birds. By placing pieces of
shell in exposed locations away from the gulls’ nests, Tinbergen found that the white interior of the shells were visible from the air and did indeed attract predators.
The ethologist’s method of studying an animal begins with the creation of an ethogram, an objective description of its behavior patterns, including hunting, eating, sleeping, fighting, and nest-building. Four types of
questions are raised about each activity: the cause of the
behavior, development (within the lifetime of the individual animal), evolution (within the lifetime of the species),
and adaptive function (how it helps the animal’s species
survive). Then, the researcher may turn to existing data
on related species in various habitats and/or conduct independent research with reference to the animal’s natural
environment. Experiments may be conducted within the
environment itself, or by investigating the effects of removing the animal from that environment. Laboratory
studies may also be done, but these will usually be in relation to some aspect of the animal’s own habitat.
Early theories of ethology focused on instinctive behaviors called fixed action patterns (FAPs), unlearned
actions activated by “innate releasing mechanisms” that
were thought to occur in response to specific stimuli. For
example, submissive behavior could be regarded as a
stimulus triggering an end to aggression on the part of a
dominant animal. More recently, the focus of ethological
theory has shifted to include an increasing awareness of
behaviors that cannot be attributed to innate genetic
processes, and learning has come to play a greater role in
explanations of animal behavior. One example is the
changing attitude toward the key concept of imprinting,
first used by Lorenz to describe a nonreversible behavioral response acquired early in life, normally released
by a specific triggering stimulus or situation. The differences between imprinting and ordinary learning include
the fact that imprinting can take place only during a limited “critical period,” what is imprinted cannot be forgotten, and imprinting does not occur in response to a reward. Imprinting was initially regarded as totally innate,
but subsequent research has found that conditioning
plays a role in this process.
230

Initially, ethology encompassed broad areas of behavioral study. More recently it has emphasized detailed
study of particular behaviors. An emerging subfield, molecular ethology, focuses on how behaviors are affected by
a single gene. Additional subdisciplines derived from
classical ethology include sociobiology, which also involves gene study, and behavioral ecology, which relates
behavior to the ecological conditions in which it occurs.
See also Adaptation; Comparative psychology
Further Reading
Moynihan, Martin. The New World Primates: Adaptive Radiation and the Evolution of Social Behavior, Languages,
and Intelligence. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 1976.

Etiology
The study and investigation into the root causes of a
psychological disorder so that it might be resolved.

Psychological etiology refers to the scientific investigation into the origins of a disorder that cannot be explained biologically. Etiology is complicated by the fact
that most disorders have more than one cause. Early etiological theories were the Freudian and post-Freudian psychoanalytic beliefs. Sigmund Freud attributed mental or
neurotic disorders to deep-seated or hidden psychic motivations. The unconscious played the primary role in
Freud’s approach. According to Freud, the person in conflict was unaware of the cause because it was too deeply
embedded in an inaccessible part of the mind. Freud postulated that the occurrence of previous traumas, unacceptable
feelings, or wanton drives enacted a defense mechanism
that enabled this burial into the unconscious. As a means of
survival, a person might push such unsavory thoughts and
memories as far from the conscious mind as possible.
Childhood, according to Freud, was the time when
many repressed motivations and defense mechanisms
began to thrive. Without control over their own lives,
children have no way to resolve such emotions that include frustration, insecurity, or guilt. These emotions essentially build up while the child’s personality is developing into adulthood. Every psychological disorder
from sexual dysfunction to anxiety might be explained
after talking about the repressed feelings a person has
harbored since childhood.

The change in theory
A new trend in determining the causes of psychological disorders began to thrive after World War II. Some of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

at the level of DNA. Researchers have been working for
decades to isolate a gene that contains the “program” for
schizophrenia. In fact, reports of fully recovered schizophrenics treated without medication continued to rise by
2000. Psychological intervention seems to be just as effective as medical treatment for schizophrenic episodes.

Another type of etiology that emerged after Freud is
called behavioral etiology. This focuses on learned behaviors as causes of mental disorders. Ivan Pavlov and
B. F. Skinner are two famous behavioral psychologists.
Behaviorists argue that the mind can be “trained” to respond to stimuli in various ways. A conditioned response is one which is learned when a stimulus produces
a response, and that response is somehow reinforced. A
young girl, for example, is told she is cute for screeching
at the sight of a spider. She learns that this screech produces a favorable response from onlookers. Over time,
this learned behavior may develop into a truly paralyzing
fear of spiders. Behaviorists believe that just as a person
can be conditioned to respond to a stimulus in a particular way, that same person can be conditioned to respond
differently. In other words, more appropriate behavior
can be learned, which is the basis for behavioral therapy.

Jane Spear

With modern approaches to therapy, including the
existential and cognitive approach, psychology has
moved away from depicting mental illnesses as emerging from one root cause. For example, clinical psychologists generally search for a complexity of issues that
stem from emotional, psychosexual, social, cultural, or
existential causes. The cognitive approach, such as that
developed by Aaron Beck, attempts to readapt behavioral responses through a rational process that demands
an honesty and discipline to undo fears and anxieties.
Cognitive therapies might even have a positive role in
treating schizophrenia without medication.
While psychologists have focused on the mind itself
as the location where psychological impairment might
begin, medical doctors and researchers have continued to
understand the biology that might influence mental disorders. Many of these studies have resulted in the refinement of prescription medications that alter a person’s
biochemistry to prevent or control various illnesses such
as depression or schizophrenia. Neuropathology, or
damage to brain tissue, can also serve as a biological
cause of psychological disorders. Genetic research has
been conducted to determine causes of certain disorders

Crucial to the treatment of any disorder is an understanding of its possible causes. Psychologists need to determine the etiology of a disorder before they can modify
behavior.
See also Behaviorism; Cognitive therapy

Further Reading
Benner, David G., and Hill, Peter C., ed. Baker Encyclopedia
of Psychology & Counseling. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker
Books, 1999.
Corsini, Ray, ed. Encyclopedia of Psychology, Second Edition.
New York: John Wiley & Sons 1994.
McGuire, Patrick A. New Hope for People with Schizophrenia.
APA Monitor on Psychology, February 2, 2000.

Further Information
American Psychological Association. 750 First Street, N.E.,
Washington, D.C., USA. 20002-4242, 202-336-5500,
800-374-2721.

Eugenics
The systematic attempt to increase desirable genetic traits and to decrease undesirable genetic traits
in a population.

As Charles Darwin’s ideas on evolutionary theory
gained acceptance in the late 1800s, the public’s faith in
science as a source for social remedies increased in popularity, and scientists have looked for ways to “improve”
humanity. British scientist Francis Galton introduced
the ideas that led to a scientific approach to eugenics, including the concept of “positive eugenics” in which he
encouraged the healthiest and most intelligent to marry
one another and procreate. Although Galton’s theories
did not gain widespread acceptance in England, in the
United States his ideas were interpreted in programs of
“negative eugenics,” designed to keep certain people
from bearing children. Negative eugenics included such
extreme measures as castration and sterilization as well
as the institutionalization of people considered “defective” or “undesirable.”
Racial, social, and moral issues were key factors in
the American eugenics movement. Its victims included

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

231

Eugenics

the psychologists who proposed this new etiology had
studied under Freud but ultimately looked further to explain the nature and causes of psychological disorders.
Carl Jung, for example, believed that a person’s need for
spirituality lead to dissatisfaction if it were not met. The
inability to thus define oneself spiritually contributed to
the rise of psychological or neurotic disorders. For Alfred
Adler, feelings of inferiority captured the focus of conflict. Others, including Harry Stack Sullivan, Karen Horney, and Erick Fromm, used Freud’s theory as a basis for
their thought but emphasized instead the importance of
social, cultural, and environmental factors in uncovering
the causes for psychological problems.

Existential psychology

individuals diagnosed with mental retardation, psychiatric symptoms, epilepsy, or deafness, and people considered to be of low moral stature—unwed mothers, thieves,
and prostitutes, for such behaviors were thought to be genetically based. A number of states enacted miscegenation laws that prohibited marriage between people of different races because it was believed that mixing the genes
of different races would allow undesirable traits to proliferate in the dominant population. In an attempt to keep
the “unfit” from procreating, legislators passed compulsory sterilization laws. Indiana was the first state to pass
such legislation in 1907; by 1932, thirty states had similar
laws. Prior to these statutes, however, compulsory sterilization had been an accepted practice in parts of the Midwest, and by the end of the eugenics movement, approximately 20,000 people had been sterilized.
In one particularly noteworthy case, the state of Virginia had ordered that Carrie Buck, an allegedly retarded
women, be sterilized against her will. Later, Buck sued
the state in a case that ultimately went to the Supreme
Court. With a single dissenting vote, the Court upheld
the existing sterilization laws, with Chief Justice Oliver
Wendell Holmes handing down the opinion that it would
be better to sterilize a feebleminded woman than to
allow her to bear children who would ultimately become
thieves and murderers. Recent investigations have revealed that Carrie Buck was completely normal intellectually, as was a daughter—conceived before the sterilization in a case of rape—who, before her death at the age
of eight, performed quite satisfactorily in school. The
daughter, Vivian Dobbs, had been diagnosed as retarded
at six months of age during a cursory examination by a
social worker.
In some cases, mental retardation was diagnosed on
the basis of intelligence test scores. One prominent psychologist, Henry H. Goddard (1866-1957) actively campaigned to keep mentally retarded individuals from having children, and segregated students living at the New
Jersey Vineland Training School for Feeble-Minded
Girls and Boys by sex so that they could not procreate.
Goddard also worked to keep “defective” immigrants
from entering the United States. In one instance, he used
Alfred Binet’s intelligence test to assess 35 Jews, 22
Hungarians, 50 Italians, and 45 Russians at Ellis Island
in New York as they entered the country, and concluded
that on average, over 80 percent of the immigrants
scored so low as to be reflective of mental retardation. In
this case, low test scores are not surprising given that the
immigrants were tested in a language foreign to them
(English), were probably intimidated by the testing situation, and were unfamiliar with American culture. Subsequent immigration laws included provisions relating to
the intelligence quotients of potential immigrants.
232

Many of the tenets of the American eugenics movement were initially promulgated by the American Breeder’s Association. While reputable scientific research did
not support many of the ideas of the eugenicists, they did
attempt to invoke science as the foundation for their
ideas. The “research” employed was often regarded as
low quality by the top scientists of the day, and its “findings” were considered flawed. In fact, Goddard’s discredited research involving the famous lineage of the
Kallikak family is now regarded as an example of poorly conceived and biased science.
American eugenics laws were widely supported up
until World War II, when evidence of atrocities committed at Nazi death camps were publicized. The eugenics
movement can be seen as more a socially than a scientifically based enterprise; only when the malignant implications of eugenics became clear did the American public withdraw its support.
See also Heredity; Jukes family; Nature-nurture
controversy
Further Reading
Bajema, Carl Jay, ed. Eugenics: Then and Now. Stroudsburg,
PA: Dowden, Hutchinson & Ross, 1976.
Darwin, Leonard. What Is Eugenics? London: Watts, 1928.
East, Edward Murray. Mankind at the Crossroads. New York:
C. Scribner’s Sons, 1923.
Goddard, Henry Herbert. The Kallikak Family: A Study in the
Heredity of Feeble-Mindedness. New York: Macmillan,
1927.
Packard, Vance Oakley. The People Shapers. Boston: Little,
Brown, 1977.

Existential psychology
A system in psychology focused on the belief that
the essence of humans is their existence.

Existential psychology is an approach to psychology and psychotherapy that is based on several premises, including: understanding that a “whole” person is
more than the sum of his or her parts; understanding
people by examining their interpersonal relationships,
understanding that people have many levels of selfawareness that can be neither ignored nor put into an
abstract context, understanding that people have free
will and are participants rather than observers in their
own lives, and understanding that people’s lives have
purpose, values, and meaning. Therapists who practice
existential psychology treat their clients by submerging
themselves in the client’s world. For the therapist, therapy is a process in which they, too, are participating.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

ber 5, 1959, that the idea of existential psychology and
its terms began to reach the forefront of psychological
thought and practice.

An important distinction exists between the concept
of existentialism and existential phenomenology, even if
the two are often linked to one another. According to a
leading existential psychologists, Swiss Psychiatrist
Ludwig Binswanger, “…while the existential therapist
enters into the phenomena present before and with him
or her, existentialism does not confine itself to states of
withness. It includes the existence of the whole being.”
In other words, existential therapists are concerned with
the whole of their clients as they can experience with
them, whereas existential phenomenology studies the
whole being—that which can be experienced as well as
that which cannot. Binswanger formulated his belief
around three different aspects of human existence. These
included the Umwelt, or “world around,” meaning the biological drive natural to humans; Mitselt, or “with
world,” the social and interpersonal human relationships;
and the Eigenwelt, or “own world,” the subjective, phenomenological world of the self.

After the symposium, the term existentialism had
become one of the “buzz” words of psychology in the
1960s. May described the existential approach to psychotherapy by stating that the task of therapy was to understand the patient fully as that patient truly exists.
Such therapy would require a commitment on the part of
the patients to fully understand the lives they were living, or the lives in which they were existing.

History of the movement
Danish philosopher Soren Kierkegaard (1813–55)
is commonly referred to as the “Father of Existentialism.” Kiekegaard stated, “I exist, therefore I think,” in
contrast to philosopher Rene Descartes’s famous words,
“I think, therefore I am.” This simple statement influenced an entire group of European philosophers and
psychologists, changing their approach to treatment.
Kiekegaard’s philosophy was not as readily accepted in
the United States. Rollo May (1909–94), the American
psychologist who would become one of the existential
movement’s biggest proponents, attributed the introduction of the existentialist idea in the United States to the
famed psychologist and philosopher, William James.
James was an advocate of the principle of free will, a
crucial component in existential thought. Throughout
the 1920s and 1930s, existentialism was being quietly
introduced, primarily in university classrooms. May
himself was introduced to the idea through Paul Tillich
at the Union Theological Seminary in New York where
he was studying to be a Congregationalist minister.
Noted professionals such as Viktor Frankl (1905–97)
were beginning to introduce existentialism to the world
through their writings and lectures. Frankl had survived
internment at the Nazi death camp Theresienstadt and
wrote personally of the events that shaped his beliefs. It
was not until May and fellow psychologists Abraham
Maslow and Herman Feifel participated in the American Psychological Association (APA) Symposium on
Existential Psychology and Psychotherapy on Septem-

In addition to its significance as a major system of
psychological practice, existentialism represented an
awareness that emerged following World War II, particularly with the Baby Boomer generation. No longer were
such philosophical concepts as existentialism left to the
private halls of universities. For example, May’s book
Love and Will remained on U.S. lists of bestsellers for
over four months, indicating that a new age of people
from various educational backgrounds were ready to
look into themselves as only a few had done in the preceding decades. Self-help books also lined bookstore
shelves, an indication of the willingness of people to explore deep into their own existence.
Jane Spear
Further Reading
Benner, David G., and Hill, Peter C., eds. Baker Encyclopedia
of Psychology & Counseling Grand Rapids, MI: Baker
Books, 1999.
Frankl, Viktor. Man’s Search for Meaning. (Original publication date: 1963) Harcover: Beacon Press, May 2000.
Mass Market Paperback, 1990.
May, Rollo. Love and Will. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.,
1969.
May, Rollo. The Discovery of Being: Writings in Existential
Psychology. (Reprint) New York: W.W. Norton & Co.,
1994.

Further Information
Rollo May Center for Humanistic Studies, Saybrook Graduate
School & Research Center. 450 Pacific, 3rd floor, San
Francisco, California, USA. 94133, 800-825-4480.
Viktor Frankl Institut. Langwiesgasse 6, A-1140, Vienna, Austria. (+43-1)914-2683.

Experimenter bias
See Experimental design

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

233

Experimenter bias

This is a process that seeks meaning within the whole
of the person’s existence, including the client’s personal history.

Experimental design

clude automation of research procedures. In this way, an
experimenter cannot provide cues to the participant because the procedure is mechanical. Computer-directed
experiments can be very useful in reducing this bias.

Experimental design
Careful and detailed plan of an experiment.

In simple psychological experiments, one characteristic—the independent variable—is manipulated by the
experimenter to enable the study of its effects on another
characteristic—the dependent variable. In many experiments, the independent variable is a characteristic that
can either be present or absent. In these cases, one group
of subjects represent the experiment group, where the independent variable characteristic exists. The other group
of subjects represent the control group, where the independent variable is absent.
The validity of psychological research relies on
sound procedures in which the experimental manipulation of an independent variable can be seen as the sole
reason for the differences in behavior in two groups. Research has shown, however, that an experimenter can unknowingly affect the outcome of a study by influencing
the behavior of the research participants.
When the goal of an experiment is more complicated, the experimenter must design a test that will test the
effects of more than one variable. These are called multivariate experiments, and their design requires sophisticated understanding of statistics and careful planning of
the variable manipulations.
When the actual experiment is conducted, subjects
are selected according to specifications of the independent and dependent variables. People who participate as
research subjects often want to be helpful as possible and
can be very sensitive to the subtle cues on the part of the
experimenter. As a result, the person may use a small
smile or a frown by the experimenter as a cue for future
behavior. The subject may be as unaware of this condition, known as experimenter bias, as the experimenter.
Experimenter bias is not limited to research with
people. Studies have shown that animals (e.g., laboratory
rats) may act differently depending on the expectations of
the experimenter. For example, when experimenters expected rats to learn a maze-running task quickly, the rats
tended to do so; on the other hand, animals expected not
to learn quickly showed slower learning. This difference
in learning resulted even when the animals were actually
very similar; the experimenter’s expectations seemed to
play a causal role in producing the differences.
Some of the studies that have examined experimenter bias have been criticized because those studies
may have had methodological flaws. Nonetheless, most
researchers agree that they need to control for the experimenter bias. Some strategies for reducing such bias in234

Another means of eliminating experimenter bias if to
create a double-blind procedure in which neither the subject nor the experimenter knows which condition the subject is in. In this way, the experimenter is not able to influence the subject to act in a particular way because the researcher does not know what to expect from that subject.
The results of experiments can also be influenced by
characteristics of an experimenter, such as sex, race, euthanasic or other personal factors. As such, a subject
might act in an unnatural way not because of any behavior on the part of the experimenter, but because of the
subject’s own biases.
Further Reading
Christensen, Larry B. Experimental Methodology. 5th ed.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1991.
Elmes, David G. Research Methods in Psychology. 4th ed. St.
Paul: West Publishing Company, 1992.
Martin, David W. Doing Psychology Experiments. 2nd ed.
Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1985.

Experimental group
A group of subjects in a research experiment that
receives an experimental treatment.

Psychologists conduct experiments in order to isolate causes and effects. Ultimately, explaining human behavior consists of identifying the factors that have a
causal influence on how we think or act. The most effective way to investigate causation is through experimentation. Different aspects of an experiment are best explained by providing an example. Suppose a researcher
wants to find out if subliminal, auditory self-help tapes
have any therapeutic benefits. These cassette tapes are
available by mail order from a number of companies.
They purport to help people change all sorts of bad
habits, such as over-eating or smoking. Most tapes consist of music, ocean waves, and the occasional bird cry.
According to the manufacturers, however, there are subliminal (i.e., undetectable) messages embedded in the
tapes that have an unconscious influence on the listeners’ motivations. Consequently, someone wishing to stop
smoking could listen to such a tape on a regular basis,
with the expectation that smoking frequency would decline after a few weeks.
To test these products, a research psychologist would
conduct a controlled experiment. Research participants

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Some additional factors would also need to be controlled. Expectancy effects can affect peoples’ behaviors,
independently of whatever treatment they might be receiving. Participants in the experimental group, for example, might expect their smoking to decline because of
their faith in the tapes and the knowledge about the subliminal messages contained on them. They could become
more self-conscious about their smoking habits, and consequently smoke less. If such a change were to occur, it
could be a result of the subjects’ beliefs and expectations
about the treatment, rather than the treatment itself. To
protect against this possibility, subjects are not informed
of which group they are members. Because the subliminal tapes are indistinguishable from the placebo tapes,
participants would have no way of knowing to which
condition they were assigned. The subjects are said to be
“blind” with respect to which treatment, if any, they are
receiving. Sometimes the researchers’ expectations can
also influence participants’ behavior. If the researcher
has high hopes for the success of the treatment, he or she
might inadvertently communicate this enthusiasm by
means of facial expressions, posture, or tone of voice.

These social cues could alter the motivations of the participants. If the researcher knows which subjects are in
the placebo condition and which ones are in the experimental condition, they could unwittingly treat the two
groups differently. To protect against this, a double-blind
study is conducted. The tapes would be coded in such a
way that the person actually administering the tapes and
the instructions to the users is kept in the dark about
which subjects are receiving which tapes. This would
guard against subjects in different conditions getting differential treatment from the research staff.
The experiment described above is relatively simple,
but it contains the essential properties of any true experiment—random assignment of subjects to conditions, and
the use of a control group. More complex experimental
designs may consist of several different conditions or
treatments, along with relatively elaborate controls. Controlled experiments are a powerful means of discovering
cause-effect relationships, but other research techniques
are also valuable. Sometimes experimentation is impossible because of practical or ethical constraints. For example, questions about the effects of homelessness, neglect,
or malnutrition cannot be investigated by experimental
means. The careful use of alternative methods can help
answer some of these difficult yet important questions.
Timothy E. Moore
Further Reading
Graziano, A., & Raulin, M. L. Research Methods: A process of
inquiry. Boston: Allyn & Bacon, 2000.

Experimental psychology
The scientific investigation of basic behavioral
processes including sensation, emotion, and motivation, as well as such cognitive processes as perception, memory, learning, problem-solving, and
language.

Experimental psychologists work to understand the
underlying causes of behavior by studying humans and
animals. Animals are studied within and outside laboratory settings for a variety of reasons. A researcher may
wish to learn more about a particular species, to study
how different species are interrelated, to investigate the
evolutionary significance of certain behaviors, or to learn
more about human behavior.
Experimental psychology flourished in the second
half of the nineteenth century with the work of such figures as G. T. Fechner (1801-1887), whose Elements of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

235

Experimental psychology

would be recruited, and perhaps even paid to participate
in the study. Most smokers report difficulty in quitting,
even when motivated to do so, thus finding interested volunteers would not be too difficult. Half the participants
would be assigned to the “experimental group,” and the
other half to the “control group.” Subjects in the experimental group would be provided with subliminal tapes
designed to assist in smoking cessation. Those in the control condition would receive identical tapes, except that
the control tapes would contain no subliminal messages.
This condition is sometimes referred to as the “placebo”
condition. The purpose of randomly assigning subjects to
the experimental and control conditions is to try to insure
that the two groups are roughly equivalent with respect to
characteristics that could affect their reactions to the
tapes. For example, we would not want the groups to differ in terms of the composition of heavy versus light
smokers. Nor would we want highly motivated individuals in one group, and relatively indifferent participants in
the other. Random assignment makes it unlikely that
groups differ much from one another on such factors. Establishing the equivalence of groups beforehand is important because the researchers are predicting that people in
the experimental group will either stop smoking, or will
smoke less after receiving the treatment compared to the
control group (assuming that the treatment works). A
difference in cessation rates between the two groups will
be interpreted as evidence of the efficacy of the tapes. If
the groups differed from one another beforehand (say in
terms of motivation), it would be impossible to attribute
subsequently observed differences to the treatment.

Experimental psychology

Psychology (1860) is considered the first study in the
field, and Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920), who established the first psychological laboratory in 1879. Others,
including Hermann Ebbinghaus and E.B. Titchener
(1867-1927), used laboratory methods to investigate
such areas as sensation, memory, reaction time, and
rudimentary levels of learning. While controlled laboratory studies continue to make major contributions to the
field of psychology, experimental methods have also
been used in such diverse areas as child development,
clinical diagnosis, and social problems. Thus, the concept of experimentation can no longer be limited to the
laboratory, and “experimental psychology” is now defined by method and by the kinds of processes being investigated, rather than its setting.
An experiment in any setting tests a hypothesis, a
tentative explanation for an observed phenomenon or
a prediction about the outcome of a specific event
based on theoretical assumptions. All experiments
consist of an independent variable, which is manipulated by the researcher, and a dependent variable,
whose outcome will be linked to the independent variable. For example, in an experiment to test the sleepinducing properties of the hormone melatonin, the administration of the hormone would be the independent
variable, and the resulting amount of sleep would be
the dependent variable.
In simplest terms, the effects of the independent
variable are determined by comparing two groups which
are as similar to each other as possible, with the exception that only one group has been exposed to the independent variable being tested. That group is called the
experimental group; the other group, which provides a
baseline for measurement, is called the control group.
Although ideally the experimental and control
groups will be as similar as possible, in practice, most
psychological research is complicated by a variety of
factors. For example, some random variables—differences in both the subjects themselves and in the testing
conditions—are unavoidable and have the potential to
disrupt the experiment. In addition, many experiments
include more than one group of subjects, and establishing a true control group is not possible. One method of
offsetting these problems is to randomly assign subjects
to each group, thus distributing the effect of uncontrollable variables as evenly as possible.
The subjects’ attitudes toward the experimental situation is another condition that may influence the results. This phenomenon is best demonstrated by what is
referred to as the placebo effect. Subjects in experiments that test medical and psychological treatments
often show improvement solely because they believe
236

the treatment has been administered. Thus, the administration of a placebo (a supposed treatment that in fact
contains no active ingredient) to a control group can
disclose to the experimenter whether improvement in
the subjects’ conditions has been caused by the treatment itself or only by the subjects’ belief that their condition will improve. Interference may come from an additional variable, experimenter bias, the unintentional
effect of the experimenter’s attitudes, behavior, or personal interests on the results of an experiment. The experimenter may, for example, read instructions to two
groups of research subjects differently, or unintentionally allow one group slightly more or less time to complete an experiment. A particularly powerful type of experimenter bias is the self-fulfilling prophecy, whereas
the researcher’s expectations influence the results. In a
well-known example, when laboratory assistants working with two groups of randomly selected rats were told
that one group was brighter than the other, they treated
the rats in such a way that the supposedly “brighter”
group learned to negotiate a maze faster than the other
group. Subtle differences in the assistants’ handling of
the “brighter” group had produced the results they were
conditioned to expect.
In experiments utilizing a placebo, experimenter
bias may be prevented by a double-blind design, in
which not only the subjects but also the persons administering the experiment are unaware of which is the
control group and what results are expected. In general, experimenters can minimize bias by making a vigilant attempt to recognize it when it appears, as well as
resisting the temptation to intentionally influence the
outcome of any experiment. The results of experiments
are generally presented in a report or article that follows a standard format of introduction, method, results, and conclusion.
Experimental research can also be conducted
through quasi-experiments, studies which lack the control of a true experiment because one or more of its requirements cannot be met, such as the deliberate use of
an independent variable or the random assignment of
subjects to different groups. Studies of the effects of
drugs on pregnant women, for instance, are based on
data about women who have already been pregnant and
either taken or not taken drugs. Thus, the researcher has
no control over the assignment of subjects or the choices
with which they are presented, but he or she can still
measure differences between the two populations and
obtain significant findings. These findings gain validity
when they are based on data obtained from large numbers of subjects and when their results can be replicated
a number of times. Such studies provide a basis for investigations that would otherwise be impossible.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Extroversion

Further Reading
D’Amato, M. R. Experimental Psychology: Methodology, Psychophysics, and Learning. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970
Kantowitz, Barry H. Experimental Psychology: Understanding
Psychological Research. 5th ed. St. Paul: West Publishing
Company, 1994.

Extinction
The elimination of a conditioned response by withholding reinforcement.

In classical/respondent conditioning, the learned
response disappears when the association between conditioned and unconditioned stimuli is eliminated. For
example, when a conditioned stimulus (a light) is presented with an unconditioned stimulus (meat), a dog
may be trained to salivate in response to the conditioned
stimulus. If the unconditioned stimulus does not appear
at least some of the time, however, its association with
the conditioned stimulus will be lost, and extinction of
the dog’s learned or conditioned response will occur.
As a result, the dog will stop salivating in response to
the light.
In operant conditioning, the experimental subject
acquires a conditioned response by learning that its actions will bring about specific consequences, either positive or negative. When the link between this operant response and its consequences is not reinforced, extinction
of the response occurs. Thus, a rat that has learned that
pressing a lever in its cage will produce a food pellet will
gradually stop pressing the lever if the food pellets fail to
appear.
Just as behavioral therapies use reinforcement to
foster desirable behaviors, they may achieve the extinction of undesirable ones by removing various forms of
reinforcement. For example, rowdy or otherwise inappropriate behavior by children is often “rewarded” by attention from both adults and peers. Sending a child to
“time out” short circuits this process and can eliminate
the undesirable behavior by removing the reward. Although it works slowly, extinction is a popular technique
for modifying behavior in children.

A term used to characterize people who are typically outgoing, friendly, and open toward others.

Extroverts are people who are often leaders, work
well in groups, and prefer being with others to being
alone. Other personality traits often associated with extroversion include optimism, risk taking, and love of excitement and change. People who are extroverts prefer
having company and tend to have many friends.
Extroversion is generally defined in comparison to
its opposite, introversion, which is used to describe
people who are quieter, more reserved and sensitive,
and more comfortable in solitary pursuits. The two
tendencies can be regarded as opposite ends of a continuum, with most people falling somewhere in between. Nevertheless, many people have traits that
clearly place them closer to one end than to the other.
Both extroversion and introversion in some people are
thought to be the result of inborn tendencies—called
temperament—that are shaped by environmental factors. The psychologist Hans Eysenck has suggested
that the temperamental foundation involves the ease
with which the cerebral cortex becomes aroused.
Eysenck notes that in introverts some parts of the
brain are very sensitive to arousal and are easily overstimulated, causing them to prefer quiet surroundings
and calm situations. The extrovert, on the other hand,
can tolerate a higher level of cortical arousal and thus
seeks out social interaction and exciting situations for
stimulation.
Tendencies toward extroversion or introversion
often lead people to develop and cultivate contrasting
strengths, sometimes referred to in terms of contrasting
types of intelligence. Extroverts more readily develop
interpersonal intelligence, which has to do with making
friends easily, demonstrating leadership ability, and
working effectively with others in groups. In introverts
the more highly developed traits are more likely to be
those associated with intrapersonal intelligence, such as
the deeper awareness of one’s feelings and the ability to
enjoy extended periods of solitude. All people have both
types of intelligence, but in many people one is stronger
than the other, depending on whether the person is an introvert or an extrovert.
Further Reading

Further Reading
Craighead, W. Edward. Behavior Modification: Principles, Issues, and Applications. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1976.
Skinner, B.F. About Behaviorism. New York: Knopf, 1974.

Eysenck, Hans J., and Michael Eysenck. Personality and Individual Differences. New York: Plenum Press, 1985.
Campbell, Joseph, ed. The Portable [Carl] Jung. New York:
Viking, 1971.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

237

Extroversion

See also Experimental design; Research methodology

Hans Juergen Eysenck

Hans Juergen Eysenck
1916-1997
German-born British psychologist whose unorthodox views generated controversy.

Hans Eysenck’s obituary in the New York Times
called him “one of the most distinguished, prolific, and
maddeningly perverse psychologists of his generation.”
This accurately sums up a long career that Eysenck
claimed he entered almost by accident. As a personality
and behavior theorist, he popularized the terms “introvert” and “extrovert,” and he created a personality inventory test based on his many years of research in London. He published more than 80 books and 1,600 journal
articles. Yet he also generated enormous controversy during his career. He argued that psychotherapy had little if
any value; that smoking did not cause lung cancer, and,
most contentious, that there was a correlation between
race and I.Q. scores. While he made many enemies in
many circles, he also had many supporters who claimed
that his ideas had been taken out of context.
Born in Berlin on March 4, 1916, Hans Juergen
Eysenck was the son of Eduard Anton and Ruth Werner
Eysenck. Both his parents were actors; his mother appeared in silent films. They divorced in 1918 and young
Hans was primarily raised by his grandmother. He attended school primarily in Berlin and had planned to go to the
University there when he graduated high school in 1934.
When he found out that acceptance into the University of
Berlin was contingent on joining the Nazi party, he found
this unacceptable and left Germany. He studied literature
and history at the University of Dijon in France and later
at University College of Exeter in England. He moved to
London and had planned to study physics there, but he
did not qualify for admission into the program. When he
tried to register as a science student, he was told that he
could only take psychology. Initially disenchanted with
the subject, he soon warmed to it, particularly statistical
analysis and research. He received his bachelor’s degree
in 1938 and his Ph.D. in 1940.

Begins career in behavior research
Turned down for British military service because he
was still a German citizen, Eysenck was later allowed to
join Britain’s civil defense program. In 1942, he took a
position as a research psychologist at the Mill Hill Emergency Hospital outside London. Many of the staff were
from London’s Maudsley Hospital, a psychiatric training
institution that had been closed because of the war.
When it re-opened in 1946, Eysenck took a position
there as a senior research psychologist. He became di238

rector of the psychology department there a year later. In
1950 the University of London established its Institute of
Psychiatry at Maudsley, and Eysenck established its psychology department. He also became a professor of psychology at the University.
Personality was what most intrigued Eysenck, and
he conducted expensive research on different personality
types. He was influenced in part by scientists such as
Ivan Pavlov, famous for his experiments with conditioned reflexes. But he also placed considerable importance on statistical research. Genetics, too, played a role
in Eysenck’s research. He came up with a series of personality “dimensions” to explain different behaviors.
These include neurosis, introversion-extroversion, and
psychosis. He used his theories and his statistical research to explain in part what made shy people shy, for
example, or what made people engage in criminal behavior. He also developed the Maudsley Personality Inventory (used widely in Britain), a test that determined a person’s basic personality type.

Invites controversy on several fronts
Along with the research results that were lauded by
both his colleagues and the public at large, however, he
made numerous conclusions that for many called into
question his abilities as a serious scientist. As early as
the 1950s, Eysenck was claiming that psychotherapy had
no beneficial effect on people. He believed that behavior
therapy yielded much better results because it dealt with
the present rather than some deep dark past. Although in
later years he did grow somewhat more accepting of certain types of psychotherapy, he remained for the most
part skeptical of its true worth.
His theories on smoking and lung cancer were hardly popular (except, perhaps, with tobacco companies).
He believed that certain personality types were susceptible both to taking up smoking and to the diseases it
could cause.
By far his most controversial views were those on
race and intelligence. The American psychologist
Arthur Jensen claimed in the late 1960s that race was a
factor in I.Q. scores, with blacks scoring about 15 points
lower on the tests. Eysenck came to Jensen’s aid and said
that the difference in scores was based on genetic as well
as physiological factors. Not surprisingly, the negative
publicity generated by a statement like this was so strong
that when he was visiting the University of California at
Berkeley in 1971, he had to be escorted about the campus by armed bodyguards. Eysenck claimed that his conclusions were purely scientific and were not based on
racism. His detractors were invariably surprised when
they found out he had voluntarily left Nazi Germany.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

until almost the time of his death. Death came on September 4, 1997, at a hospice in London.

In 1996, Eysenck was diagnosed with a brain
tumor. He continued to work as much as he could, up

Gibson, H. J. Hans Eysenck: The Man and His Work. London,
Peter Owen, 1981.

See also Intelligence quotient
George A. Milite
Further Reading
Current Biography 1972. New York, H.W. Wilson Co., 1972.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

239

Hans Juergen Eysenck

Over the next several years Eysenck continued to
conduct research, as well as keeping up his usual output
of books and articles. Even after he retired from the University in 1988 he continued to write. His second wife,
Sybil Rostal Eysenck, had been a psychology student.
Because of this connection, the Eysencks often collaborated on different projects. The Eysencks, who married
in 1950, had four children. (Eysenck’s first to Margaret
Davies produced a son.)

F
unprepared to cope with the demands of school because
of cultural and linguistic isolation.

Familial retardation
Also called sociocultural or cultural-familial retardation, mild mental retardation attributed to environmental causes and generally involving some degree of psychosocial disadvantage.

The majority of persons suffering from mental retardation fall into the category of familial retardation
rather than that of clinical retardation, which usually has
neurological or other organic causes. Persons with familial retardation typically have IQs ranging from 55-69
and show no signs of physical disability. Environmental
causes thought to contribute to familial retardation include the quality of the mother’s prenatal care, maternal
and child nutrition, family size, the spacing of births
within a family, disease, and health risks from environmental toxins such as lead. The 1994 publication of The
Bell Curve, an analysis, by Richard J. Herrnstein and
Charles Murray, of the relative importance of heredity
and environment in determining IQ scores, and the
1995 release of the most in-depth study to date on retardation among school children both renewed public interest in familial retardation and its causes.
Familial retardation is usually not detected until a
child enters school and has academic difficulties, at
which point the teacher recommends psychological evaluation. Unlike the parents of clinically retarded children,
who generally seek out help for their youngsters, the parents of those with familial retardation may take offense
when their children are labeled mentally retarded and
deny that there is a problem, especially since their children are often able to function competently in their daily
lives outside school. Some studies have shown that educators are more likely to classify poor and/or minority
children as mentally retarded, while labeling white middle-class children with comparable IQ scores as learning
disabled. Other critics have pointed out that familial retardation may be diagnosed in children who are simply
240

Familial retardation may be reduced by nutritional,
health, and educational intervention at an early age. In a
study conducted in the 1970s, educators selected mother-child pairs from among a group of women with IQs
under 75 living in the poorest section of Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, while establishing a control group of mothers in the same neighborhood with IQs over 100. For the
first five years of the children’s lives, the targeted group
of mothers and their children received instruction in
problem-solving and language skills, as well as counseling to motivate them to learn and succeed. The mothers
and children in the control group received no form of
environmental enrichment. At the age of five, the children in the target group had IQ scores averaging 26
points higher than those of the children in the control
group. At the age of nine, their average IQ was 106
(slightly above the universal norm of 100), while that of
the other children was only 79. (Later results, however,
were somewhat disappointing, as the mothers’ motivation to continue the program became difficult to maintain over the long term.)
In 1995, an Atlanta study conducted jointly by the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and Emory
University found important new evidence linking mild
retardation to social and educational deprivation. It was
found that 8.4 out of every 1,000 10-year-olds were
mildly retarded (defined as an IQ of 50-70), while 3.6 of
every 1,000 suffered severe retardation due to such conditions as cerebral palsy or Down syndrome. The incidence of mild retardation was 2.6 higher in blacks than
whites, although this difference was halved when socioeconomic factors were taken into account. Children of all
races were four times as likely to be mildly retarded if
their mothers had not finished high school. The incidence of mental retardation was also slightly higher for
children of teenage mothers. The Atlanta study also confirmed earlier claims that teachers are more likely to
seek IQ testing for minority children from poor families.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

As adults, socioculturally retarded individuals live
in a variety of settings, including their parental homes,
group homes, and their own independent residences.
Very few are institutionalized. Most make a satisfactory
adjustment to adult life in their communities, although
their adjustment in early adulthood is likely to be more
difficult than that of the average person. Often they must
learn from their own life experiences lessons that others
learned (or at least were introduced to) at home. Eventually, however, most become responsible and self-supporting members of their communities with the ability to
meet adult responsibilities and commitments.

Children in small families receive a greater amount
of individual attention and tend to be comfortable around
adults at an early age. They may also be overprotected,
however, which can result in dependence, lack of initiative, and fear of risk, and the increased parental attention
may also take the form of excessive scrutiny and pressure to live up to other people’s expectations. Researchers have found that only children are often loners
and have the lowest need for affiliation. They tend to
have high IQs and are successful academically. However,
only children have also been found to have more psychological problems than children from larger families.

Family therapy
The joint treatment of two or more members of the
same family in order to change unhealthy patterns
of communication and interaction.

Further Reading
Fraser, Steven. The Bell Curve Wars: Race, Intelligence, and
the Future of America. New York: Basic Books, 1995.
Herrnstein, Richard J., and Charles Murray. The Bell Curve:
Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life. New
York: Free Press, 1994.

Family size
The size of a family has a significant effect on the interrelationships among its members and can play a
major role in the formation of a child’s personality.

Family size is a significant factor in child development, but must be considered as only one part of a larger
picture, however. Other factors, such as the parents’ personality traits, and the gender and spacing of the children, contribute significantly to the formation of a
child’s personality. Children of large families have a
greater opportunity to learn cooperation at an early age
than children of smaller families as they must learn to
get along with siblings. They also take on more responsibility, both for themselves and often for younger brothers
and sisters. In addition, children in large families must
cope with the emotional crises of sibling rivalry, from
which they may learn important lessons that will aid
them later in life. This factor, however, may also be a
disadvantage; either the older child who was “dethroned” from a privileged position or the younger child
who is in the eldest child’s shadow may suffer feelings
of inferiority. Children in large families tend to adopt
specific roles in order to attain a measure of uniqueness
and thus gain parental attention.

Family therapy is generally initiated because of psychological or emotional problems experienced by a single family member, often a child or adolescent. These
problems are treated as symptomatic of dysfunction
within the family system as a whole. The therapist focuses on the interaction between family members, analyzing
the role played by each member in maintaining the system. Family therapy can be especially helpful for dealing
with problems that develop in response to a particular
event or situation, such as divorce or remarriage, or the
birth of a new sibling. It can also be an effective means
to draw individuals who feel threatened by individual
therapy into a therapeutic setting.
Family therapy has a variety of origins. It is related
to the long-standing emphasis of psychoanalysis and
other psychodynamic approaches on the central role that
early family relationships play in the formation of personality and the manifestation of psychological disorders. Family therapy also grew out of the realization that
progress made by patients staying in treatment centers
was often reversed when they returned to their families.
As a result, a number of therapists became dissatisfied
treating clients individually with no opportunity to actively address the harmful family relationships that were
often the source of their clients’ problems.
Family therapy, either alone or in conjunction with
other types of treatment, has been effective in the treatment of children suffering from a variety of problems,
including anxiety, enuresis (bed-wetting), and eating
disorders, and also in working with victims of child
abuse. In addition to alleviating the child’s initial complaint and improving communication within the family

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

241

Family therapy

Based on the findings of this survey, the federal government launched a pilot program to improve health and education for disadvantaged mothers and children, with
special emphasis on providing a more intellectually
stimulating home environment for at-risk youngsters
through reading programs and other activities.

Family

unit, family therapy can also help reduce stress and conflict by helping families improve their coping skills.
There are a number of approaches to family therapy. Perhaps the best known is structural family therapy,
founded by Salvador Minuchin. A short-term method
that focuses on the present rather than the past, this
school of therapy views a family’s behavior patterns
and rituals as central to the problems of its individual
members. Poor communication skills play a key role in
perpetuating destructive interactions within families,
such as the formation of alliances among some family
members against others. The goals of structural family
therapy include strengthening parental leadership,
clarifying boundaries, enhancing coping skills, and
freeing family members from their entrenched positions within the family structure. Minuchin divided
families’ styles of interacting into two basic types—enmeshed and disengaged, considering behavior at either
extreme as pathological, with most families falling
somewhere on a continuum between the two. Minuchin
believed that the functioning of family systems prevented individuals from becoming healthier emotionally,
because the family system relied on its troubled member to play a particular role in order to function in its
accustomed way. This stability is disrupted if an individual changes significantly.
Psychodynamically oriented family therapy emphasizes unconscious processes (such as the projection
of unacceptable personality traits onto another family
member) and unresolved conflicts in the parents’ families of origin. The lasting effects of such traumatic experiences as parental divorce and child abuse are explored. This type of therapy focuses more on family
history and less on symptoms, resulting in a lengthier
therapeutic process. Therapists who employ an object
relations approach emphasize the importance of having
the parents in a family work out conflicts with their
own parents. Some practitioners include grandparents
in their work with families in order to better understand
intergenerational dynamics and deeply rooted behavior
patterns. Ivan Boszormenyi-Nagy, a well-known proponent of this orientation, would only treat families when
members of three generations could participate in therapy sessions.
Behavioral family therapy views interactions within
the family as a set of behaviors that are either rewarded
or punished. The behavioral therapist educates family
members to respond to each others’ behavior with positive or negative reinforcement. A child might be discouraged from repeating a negative behavior, for example, by losing some privileges or receiving a “ time-out.”
Positive behavior might be rewarded with the use of an
incentive chart on which points or stickers are accrued
242

and eventually exchanged for a reward. Behavioral approaches sometimes involve the drawing up of behavioral “contracts” by family members, as well as the establishment of rules and reinforcement procedures.
Several other family therapy approaches, including
that of Virginia Satir, are primarily concerned with
communication. Satir’s system combines the teaching of
family communication skills, the promotion of self-esteem, and the removal of obstacles to the emotional
growth so that family members can have full access to
their innate resources.
Further Reading
Boyd-Franklin, Nancy. Black Families in Therapy. New York:
Guilford Press, 1989.
Minuchin, Salvador. Family Therapy Techniques. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1981.
Nichols, Michael P., and Richard C. Schwartz. Family Therapy:
Concepts and Methods. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1991.
Satir, Virginia. Conjoint Family Therapy. Palo Alto, CA: Science and Behavior Books, 1983.
Walters, Marianne, et. al. The Invisible Web: Gender Patterns
in Family Relationships. New York: Guilford Press, 1988.

Further Information
American Assocation for Marriage and Family Therapy. 1717
K Street N.W., Suite 407, Washington, DC 20006, (202)
452–0109.
American Family Therapy Association. 2020 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Suite 273, Washington, DC 20006, (202)
994–2776.

Family
Two or more people related to each other by genetics, adoption, marriage, or in some interpretations,
by mutual agreement.

Family is broadly defined as any two people who
are related to each other through a genetic connection,
adoption, marriage, or by mutual agreement. Family
members share emotional and economic bonds. The
term nuclear family is used to refer to family members
who live together and share emotional, economic, and
social responsibilities. The nuclear family is often comprised of a married couple who are parents to their biological or adopted children; all members live together in
one household. This type of nuclear family is increasingly referred to by social scientists as an intact family,
signifying that the family had not been through a divorce, separation, or death of a member.
In addition to the nuclear family, other complex and
diverse combinations of individuals lead to what social

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Family
Traditional family sitting down to dinner at the turn of the twentieth century. (The Library of Congress. Reproduced by permission.)

scientists call blended or nontraditional families. When a
family has experienced divorce or death leaving one parent to be primarily responsible for raising the children,
they become a single-parent family. (The terms broken
family and broken home are no longer widely used because of their negative connotations.)
Following the end of one marriage, one or both of
the ex-spouses may enter a new marriage. Through this
process of remarriage, stepfamilies are formed. The second spouse becomes a stepparent to the children from
the first marriage. In the family formed by the second
marriage, the children from each spouse’s first marriage
become step-siblings. Children born or adopted by the
couple of the second marriage are half-siblings to the
children from the first marriage, since they share one
parent in common.
In some cases, a stepparent will legally adopt his or
her spouse’s children from a previous marriage. The biological father or mother must either be absent with no
legal claim to custody, or must grant permission for the
stepparent to adopt.
In situations where a single parent lives with someone outside of marriage, that person may be referred to

as a co-parent. Co-parent is also the name given to the
partner in a homosexual relationship who shares the
household and parenting responsibilities with a child’s
legal adoptive or biological parent.
The home which was owned by the family prior to a
divorce or separation is referred to as the family home in
many state laws. In court settlements of divorce and
child custody issues, the sale of the family home may be
prohibited as long as the minor children are still living
there with the custodial parent. The sale of the home
may be permitted (or required to pay the noncustodial
parent his or her share of its value) if the custodial parent
moves or remarries, or when the children leave home to
establish their own residences.
The term extended family traditionally meant the biological relatives of a nuclear family; i.e., the parents,
sisters, and brothers of both members of a married couple. It was sometimes used to refer to the people living in
the household beyond the parents and children. As family relationships and configurations have become more
complex due to divorce and remarriage, extended family
has come to refer to all the biological, adoptive, step-,
and half-relatives.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

243

Fantasy

FATHER-CHILD HOUSEHOLD
In June 1997, the U.S. Census Bureau reported that
the number of single fathers with children under 18
grew from 400,000 in 1970 to 1.7 million in 1995. That
same year, government data shows that 2.5 million children lived with just their fathers—48% of whom were
divorced, 28% were never married, 18% were married
but not living with their wives, and 5% were widowed.
For children living with their father only:
• Median family income was $23,155 (1994).
• Percent that were classified as poor: 26%.
• Six out of ten lived with at least one sibling.
• Percent of fathers with high school diplomas: 76%.
• Percent of fathers with a bachelor’s degree or more: 12%.
• Percent with a father who was working: 79%.
• Five out of 10 lived in rental housing.
For children living with both parents:
• Median family income was $46,195 (1994).
• Percent that were classified as poor: 11%.
• More than eight out of ten lived with at least one sibling.
• Percent with at least one parent with a high school
diploma: 86%.
• Percent with at least one parent with a bachelor’s degree or more: 29%.
• Percent with at least one parent working: 85%.
• Less than 3 out of 10 lived in rental housing.

Government agencies and other statistics-gathering organizations use the term head of household to
refer to the person who contributes more than half of
the necessary support of the family members (other
than the spouse); in common usage, the head of household is the person who provides primary financial support for the family.
Further Reading
Bernardes, Jon. Family Studies: An Introduction. New York:
Routledge, 1997.
Elkind, David. Ties That Stress: The New Family Imbalance.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994.
Eshleman, J. Ross. The Family: An Introduction. 7th ed.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1994.
Kephart, William M. and Davor Jedlicka. The Family, Society,
and the Individual. 7th ed. New York: HarperCollins, 1991.
Ohio Cooperative Extension Service. Changing Families,
Challenges and Opportunities. Columbus, OH: Ohio Cooperative Extension Service: The Ohio State University,
1988. (Four sound cassettes, covering the subjects of
latchkey families, single-parent families, strengthening
step-families, and two-income families.)
244

Strong, Bryan and Christine DeVault. The Marriage and Family
Experience. 4th ed. St. Paul: West Publishing Co., 1989.
White, James M. Dynamics of Family Development: A Theoretical Perspective. New York: Guilford Press, 1991.

Further Information
Family Service Association of America (FSA), formerly the
Family Welfare Association of America). 11600 West
Lake Park Drive, Milwaukee, WI 53244, (414) 359–1040,
(800) 221–3726.
Step Family Foundation (SFF). 333 West End Avenue, New
York, NY 10023, (212) 877–3244 (Disseminates information on step families, provides counseling and training
service, and publishes informational materials.)

Fantasy
A set of mental images that generally have no basis
in reality.

A fantasy is inspired by imagination characterized
by mental images that do not necessarily have any relationship to reality. In psychoanalysis, fantasy is regarded
as a defense mechanism. For example, after being reprimanded by a supervisor, a worker may fantasize about
taking over the company and firing the supervisor. Similarly, a child may fantasize about running away from
home in retaliation against her parents for punishing her.
Vivid fantasies are often a part of childhood, diminishing as a child grows older. In the majority of individuals,
fantasy is not a cause for concern; as long as the fantasizer
is aware that the fantasy is not real, the formation of these
mental images may be considered normal. When the line
between fantasy and reality becomes blurred, however, it is
possible that some form of mental illness is present. When
the individual regards his fantasy as reality, it has become
an hallucination. In such situations, the hallucination may
be a symptom of schizophrenia, and professional evaluation by a psychologist or psychiatrist is required.
Further Reading
Klinger, Eric. Daydreaming: Using Waking Fantasy and Imagery for Self-Knowledge and Creativity. Los Angeles,
CA: J. P. Tarcher, 1990.
“What Your Fantasies Reveal About You.” American Health
(April 1995): 68+.

Fear
An intense emotional state caused by specific external stimuli and associated with avoidance, self
defense, and escape.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

cause of the problem. Mental health professionals offer
various types of psychological treatment that either attempt to deal with the underlying cause of the fear
through a psychodynamic approach or address the fear
directly through behavioral therapy. Behavioral techniques include desensitization (gradually increasing exposure to the feared object), flooding (sudden, intensive
exposure to the feared object or stimulus), and modeling
(observing another person being exposed to the feared
object without being harmed).

Fear is accompanied by a series of physiological
changes produced by the autonomic nervous system
and adrenal glands, including increased heart rate, rapid
breathing, tenseness or trembling of muscles, increased
sweating, and dryness of the mouth. Blood is diverted
from other parts of the body to the areas where energy is
most needed, either to run from danger or to forcibly
protect oneself, a reaction known as the “fight or flight”
response. This sudden diversion of excess blood from the
cerebral cortex of the brain may also cause fainting,
which in animals may actually serve an adaptive function to protect them from predators. In the 1880s,
William James concluded that the physiological
changes associated with fear actually constitute the emotion itself (e.g., “we are afraid because we tremble”), a
view that has been challenged by cognitive psychologists
since the 1950s.

Further Reading

Fears first appear in human infants at about seven
months of age. Young children generally have more
fears than older persons and their fears are experienced
more intensely. Within families, studies have shown that
middle children as a group experience fewer fears than
older or younger siblings. Researchers have disagreed
about the extent to which fear is innate or learned, with
behaviorists arguing that it is largely learned. Animals
have been conditioned to fear previously neutral stimuli
through various methods including association, the exposure to paired neutral and fear-producing stimuli to
the point where the neutral stimuli become associated
with fear, even when presented alone. Certain innate
fears such as fear of loud noises, pain, and injury appear to be universal. Species-specific innate fears have
also been documented, including a fear of hawk-like
shapes in certain animals and a fear of snakes in humans
and other primates.
When a person confronts real dangers, fear can be
an important means of self-preservation. However, many
people are plagued by chronic and unrealistic fears, including phobias and obsessions, that cause much unnecessary distress and can severely reduce their ability to
function normally in society. While it is possible to reduce pathological fears through drug treatment, the results are temporary and drugs do not address the root

Bemis, Judith. Embracing the Fear: Learning to Manage Anxiety and Panic Attacks. St. Paul, MN: Hazelden, 1994.
Forgione, Albert G. Fear: Learning to Cope. New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold, 1977.
Nardo, Don. Anxiety and Phobias. New York: Chelsea House,
1991.

Gustav Theodor Fechner
1801-1887
German experimental psychologist who founded
psychophysics and formulated Fechner’s law, a
landmark in the emergence of psychology as an
experimental science.

Gustav Theodor Fechner was born on April 19,
1801, at Gross-Särchen, Lower Lusatia. He earned his
degree in biological science in 1822 at the University of
Leipzig and taught there until his death on Nov. 18,
1887. Having developed an interest in mathematics and
physics, he was appointed professor of physics in 1834.
About 1839 Fechner had a breakdown, having injured his eyes while experimenting on afterimages by
gazing at the sun. His response was to isolate himself
from the world for three years. During this period there
was an increase in his interest in philosophy. Fechner believed that everything is endowed with a soul; nothing is
without a material basis; mind and matter are the same
essence, but seen from different sides. Moreover, he believed that, by means of psychophysical experiments in
psychology, the foregoing assertions were demonstrated
and proved. He authored many books and monographs
on such diverse subjects as medicine, esthetics, and experimental psychology, affixing the pseudonym Dr.
Mises to some of them.
The ultimate philosophic problem which concerned
Fechner, and to which his psychophysics was a solution,
was the perennial mind-body problem. His solution has
been called the identity hypothesis: mind and body are
not regarded as a real dualism, but are different sides of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

245

Gustav Theodor Fechner

Fear is one of the primary emotions, together with
joy, anger, and grief. Fear generally refers to feelings
elicited by tangible, realistic dangers, as opposed to anxiety, which often arises out of proportion to the actual
threat or danger involved. Fear may be provoked by exposure to traumatic situations, observations of other people exhibiting fear, or the receipt of frightening information. Repeated or prolonged exposure to fear can lead to
disorders such as combat fatigue, which is characterized
by long-term anxiety and other emotional disturbances.

Feral children

William James, who did not care for quantitative
analysis or the statistical approach in psychology, dismisses the psychophysic law as an “idol of the den,” the
psychological outcome of which is nothing. However,
the verdict of other appraisers is kinder, for they honor
Fechner as the founder of experimental psychology.
Further Reading
Brett, George Sidney. History of psychology. vol. 3. 1921.
Hall, G. Stanley. Founders of modern psychology. 1912.
Klemm, O. History of psychology. 1911. trans. 1914.
Ribot, T. German psychology of today: the empirical school.
trans. 1886.

Feral children
Lost or abandoned human children raised in extreme social isolation, either surviving in the wild
through their own efforts or “adopted” by animals.

Gustav Fechner (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

one reality. They are separated in the form of sensation
and stimulus; that is, what appears from a subjective
viewpoint as the mind, appears from an external or objective viewpoint as the body. In the expression of the
equation of Fechner’s law (sensation intensity = C log
stimulus intensity), it becomes evident that the dualism
is not real. While this law has been criticized as illogical,
and for not having universal applicability, it has been
useful in research on hearing and vision.
Fechner’s most significant contribution was made in
his Elemente der Psychophysik (1860), a text of the
“exact science of the functional relations, or relations of
dependency, between body and mind,” and in his Revision der Hauptpunkte der Psychophysik (1882). Upon
these works mainly rests Fechner’s fame as a psychologist, for in them he conceived, developed, and established new methods of mental measurement, and hence
the beginning of quantitative experimental psychology.
The three methods of measurement were the method of
just-noticeable differences, the method of constant stimuli, and the method of average error. According to the
authorities, the method of constant stimuli, called also
the method of right and wrong cases, has become the
most important of the three methods. It was further developed by G. E. Müller and F. M. Urban.
246

The study of children reared in complete or nearly
complete isolation from human contact can provide important information to psychologists studying various aspects of socialization. After their return to human society,
feral children often continue to be seriously retarded, raising the question of whether or not such children manifested abnormalities before their removal from society. Interest in wild or feral children dates back to Carl Linnaeus’s
1758 classification of loco ferus—“feral” or “wolf” men,
characterized as four-footed, nonspeaking, and hairy.
The most famous case of a human being surviving
in total isolation for an extended period of time is that of
Victor, the “wild boy of Aveyron,” discovered in 1799.
Lost or abandoned in childhood, he had apparently survived on his own in the wild up to the age of approximately 11. Philippe Pinel, the renowned director of the
asylum at Bicêtre, France, declared Victor an incurable
idiot, but Jean-Marc-Gaspard Itard, a physician and
teacher of the deaf, undertook to educate him. Although
he remained almost totally unable to speak, Victor
showed great improvements in socialization and cognitive ability in the course of several years spent working
with Itard. In 1807, Itard published Rapports sur le
sauvage de l’Aveyron (Reports on the Wild Boy of Aveyron), a classic work on human educability, detailing his
work with Victor between the years 1801- 05.
Unlike Victor, the young man named Kaspar Hauser
who appeared in Nuremberg, Germany, in 1828 had apparently been locked up in isolation for an extended period, but without being totally deprived of human care. A
17-year-old with the mentality of a child of three, Hauser
was reeducated over the next five years, regaining many

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Despite the persistence and popularity of stories
about children reared by animals throughout history,
well-documented cases of such children are very rare,
and in most of these cases the documentation begins
with the discovery of the child, so that virtually nothing
is known about the time actually spent in the company of
animals. In the best-known modern case of zoanthropy
(humans living among animals), however, researchers
did have some opportunities to observe the behavior of
two children—the so-called Wolf Children of Midnapore—while they were in the company of wolves, actually removing them from the embrace of a pair of wolf
cubs in order to take them back to society. Kamala and
Amala, two young girls, were observed living with
wolves in India in 1920, when Kamala was approximately eight years of age, and Amala about one and a half.
Not only did they exhibit the physical behavior of
wolves—running on all fours, eating raw meat, and staying active at night—they displayed physiological adaptations to their feral life, including modifications of the
jaw resulting from chewing on bones. Taken to an orphanage run by J.A.L. Singh, the girls were cared for
and exposed to human society. Amala, the younger one,
died within two years, but Kamala achieved a modicum
of socialization over the nine remaining years she lived.
The study of feral children has engaged some of the
central philosophical and scientific controversies about
human nature, including the nature/nurture debate as
well as questions about which human activities require
social instruction, whether or not there is a critical period for language acquisition, and to what extent can education compensate for delayed development and limited
intelligence. Itard’s pioneering work with the “wild boy
of Aveyron” has had a profound impact on both education of the disabled and early childhood education. In
1909, the renowned Italian educator and physician
Maria Montessori (1870-1952) wrote that she considered her own achievements a “summing up” of previous
progress, giving Itard a prominent place among those
whose work she saw herself as continuing.
See also Nature-nurture controversy
Further Reading
Candland, Douglas Keith. Feral Children and Clever Animals:
Reflections on Human Nature. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993.
Singh, Joseph. Wolf Children and Feral Man. Hamden, CT: Archon Books, 1966.

Leon Festinger
1919-1989
American psychologist who developed the concept
of cognitive dissonance.

Many people know that cigarettes cause cancer and
other diseases, but nonetheless continue to smoke. This
is an example of what Leon Festinger called cognitive
dissonance—the idea that when conflict arises in one’s
belief system, the resulting tension must be eliminated.
People going through cognitive dissonance will find
some rationale for whatever is causing the conflict, or
they may choose to ignore the event in question altogether. Festinger believed that people want balance in their
lives and that cognitive dissonance was a way to bring
back a lost sense of balance.
Festinger was born in New York City, on May 8,
1919, to Alex Festinger and Sara Solomon. Interested in
science at a young age, he decided to pursue a career in
psychology. He received his bachelor’s degree from City
College of New York and went on to Iowa State University for his master’s degree and his Ph.D. (which he received in 1942). For the next several years he made his
living teaching at different universities until he went to
Stanford in 1955.

Introduces theory of cognitive dissonance
At Stanford, Festinger began to fully develop the
idea he called cognitive dissonance. The original idea
stemmed from his observation that people generally
liked consistency in their daily lives. For example, some
individuals always sit in the same seat on the train or bus
when they commute to work, or always eat lunch in the
same restaurant. Cognitive dissonance is a part of this
need for consistence. Essentially, Festinger explained, all
people hold certain beliefs, and when they are asked to
do something that runs counter to their beliefs, conflict
arises. Cognitive dissonance comes into play when people try to reconcile the conflicting behaviors or ideas.
Festinger’s research resulted in a number of interesting findings. One was that the level of cognitive dissonance would decrease as the incentive to comply with
the conflict situation was increased. The reason was simple: where an incentive was involved, people felt less
conflict. Festinger and his associates conducted a simple
experiment to prove this point. College students were
asked to perform a series of repetitive menial tasks for a
specified period of time. As they finished, they were instructed that they had to inform the next group of students that the tasks had been enjoyable and interesting.
Later, the subjects were asked to describe their true feel-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

247

Leon Festinger

of the faculties that had been stunted by extreme social
and sensory deprivation, to the point where he could
communicate verbally although his speech was substandard. After an earlier assassination attempt, Hauser was
murdered in 1833, presumably by someone who sought
to prevent his origins from becoming known.

Fetal alcohol effect (FAE) and syndrome (FAS)

ings about the task. Half the group was offered a $1 bill;
the rest were offered a $20 bill. Subjects were asked afterward whether they really did find the tasks enjoyable.
Interestingly, the students who had been paid one dollar
stated that they actually did find the tasks enjoyable.
There was little or no dissonance among the students
who had been paid the $20, since, after all, they were
well rewarded for their participation. The other students,
however, had to justify having spent time doing useless
tasks and getting only a dollar as a reward. They were
the ones who were in a state of cognitive dissonance. By
convincing themselves that the tasks they performed
were not all that boring, they could rationalize having
gone through what was essentially a waste of their time.
Cognitive dissonance soon became an important and
much-discussed theory. Over the years it has generated
considerable research, in part because it is one of a number of theories based on the idea that consistency of
thought is a strong motivating factor in people.

Continues research at the New School
Festinger continued his work at Stanford until 1968
when he returned to New York City to assume the Else
and Hans Staudinger professorship at the New School
for Social Research. He continued his research on cognitive dissonance as well as other behavioral issues. He
was also active in professional organizations including
the National Academy of Sciences and the American
Academy of Arts and Sciences. He continued to work
until his death on February 11, 1989, from liver cancer.
He was survived by his wife Trudy and four children.
George A. Milite
Further Reading
Festinger, Leon. The human legacy. New York: Columbia University Press, 1983.
Festinger, Leon. A theory of cognitive dissonance. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press, 1962.

Fetal alcohol effect (FAE) and
syndrome (FAS)
The adverse and chronic effects of maternal alcohol abuse during pregnancy on her infant.

The effects of heavy maternal alcohol use during
pregnancy were first described as fetal alcohol syndrome
(FAS) in the United States in 1973. An estimated one to
three babies of every thousand births in the United States
248

Facial features of fetal alcohol syndrome.

has FAS, making FAS the leading cause of mental retardation. It is also one of the few preventable causes of
mental retardation and other birth defects. The U.S. Public Health Service estimates that between two and five of
every thousand babies born in the United States exhibits
one or more effects from fetal alcohol exposure. Although
the precise amount of alcohol that must be consumed to
cause damage is not known, it is believed that both heavy,
consistent alcohol consumption and occasional binge
drinking can produce FAS. In April 1997, the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention released the results of a
study it had conducted in 1995. In a survey of 1,313 pregnant women, 3.5% said they “drank frequently” during
pregnancy. (The agency defined “frequently” for the survey as having seven or more drinks per week, or binging
on five or more drinks once within the previous month.)
Why some fetuses are affected and others are not is
not completely understood. However, researchers believe
that a combination of genetic and environmental factors
work together to determine whether maternal alcohol
consumption will affect the development of the fetus.
Research has suggested that the genetic makeup of members of some racial and ethnic groups makes them less
able to physically break down alcohol in the liver, and as
a result, they are more susceptible to alcohol’s adverse
effects. When alcohol passes from the mother’s bloodstream across the placenta to the developing fetus, the
developing organs are unable to process it and thus are
vulnerable to damage or arrested growth.
Women who drink heavily during pregnancy have a
significantly higher risk of spontaneous abortion (known
as miscarriage); their risk of miscarriage or stillbirth is at
least twice that of nondrinkers. For the woman who carries the fetus to term (or near-term), researchers speculate

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

FAS encompasses a range of physical and mental
birth defects:
• Prenatal growth retardation (low birth weight, length,
and head circumference); may have difficulty bonding
with caregiver
• Low Apgar scores at birth
• Postnatal growth retardation (failure to gain weight and
develop normally); may show signs of developmental
delay, such as delayed walking, poor coordination, delayed language development, and problems with toilet
training. FAE/FAS toddlers may be prone to irritability
and temper tantrums.
• Intellectual and attention deficiencies
• Behavioral problems; may exhibit antisocial behaviors,
such as arson, shoplifting, lying, defiance of authority,
and destructiveness. FAS/FAE adolescents often become involved in inappropriate or unsafe sexual situations, brought about by physical maturity and emotional immaturity.
• Skull or brain malformations.
Distinctive facial features may include:
• Small head (microcephaly)
• Small eyes with folds in the skin near the nose (epicanthal folds) and short horizontal eye openings (palpebral
fissures)
• Underdevelopment of the upper lip with flat philtrum
(ridges extending vertically between the upper lip and
nose)
• Small jaw (micrognathia).
FAS/FAE is a lifelong condition that, depending on
its severity, will limit the individual’s ability to function
productively in the world. Early diagnosis and intervention with support and education services are the keys to
success in social and vocational settings.
Further Reading
Blume, Sheila B. What You Can Do to Prevent Fetal Alcohol
Syndrome: A Professional’s Guide. Minneapolis: Johnson
Institute, 1992.

Dorris, Michael. The Broken Cord. New York: Harper and
Row, 1989.
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) and Effects: What’s the Difference? Evanston, IL: Altschul Group, 1989. (For information: 1-800-421-2363) (One 24-minute videocassette.)
McCuen, Gary E., ed. Born Hooked: Poisoned in the Womb.
2nd ed. Hudson, WI: G.E. McCuen Publications, 1994.
“More Women Report Alcohol Use in Pregnancy.” New York
Times, (April 25, 1997): A13.
Nevitt, Amy. Fetal Alcohol Syndrome. New York: Rosen Publishing Group, 1996.
Steinmetz, George. “The Preventable Tragedy, Fetal Alcohol
Syndrome.” National Geographic Magazine, vol. 11, no
2, (February 1992): 36-39.
Stratton, Kathleen, Cynthia Howe, and Frederick Battaglia.
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: Diagnosis, Epidemiology, Prevention, and Treatment. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press, 1997.

Figure-ground perception
The ability to differentiate visually between an object and its background.

A person’s ability to separate an object from its surrounding visual field is referred to as figure-ground perception. The object that a person focuses on is called the
figure; everything else is referred to as background, or
simply ground.
Psychologists have created different kinds of stimuli
in order to study how people separate figure from
ground. In some cases, these stimuli involve simple ambiguous figures like the famous face-vase figure that can
be interpreted as two faces looking at one another or a
goblet, depending on what aspect a person focuses on. In
other situations, complex stimuli can be used to demonstrate figure-ground relationships. For example, the 3-D
Magic Eye pictures involve relaxing the muscles of the
eyes to see a three-dimensional figure-ground picture.
Until a viewer positions the eyes appropriately, the stimulus is invisible; when the eye muscles are appropriately
relaxed, the three-dimensional figure emerges. Easily
distracted children are often unable to focus on one object as they ignore or block out the background.
The interpretations that people derive from these
stimuli are real, even though the objects are ambiguous
or are nonexistent. A good example of this involves illusory or subjective contours. In the illustration, people
will see an entire square, complete with borders (contours), even though the borders do not really exist.
Psychologists have also demonstrated figure-ground
principles with auditory stimuli. For example, some peo-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

249

Figure-ground perception

that, in addition to genetic factors, her nutritional status
and general health will affect her ability to tolerate alcohol. Due to these and other factors, an estimated 40% of
women who drink heavily during pregnancy will give
birth to an infant with FAS; all women who drink large
amounts of alcohol during pregnancy risk giving birth to
an infant with fetal alcohol effects (FAE). FAE describes
the condition where the visible physical effects of alcohol
are less pronounced than with FAS, but where the learning and psychosocial characteristics are still pronounced.
Both FAS and FAE produce lifelong effects that can be
managed and treated but not cured.

Fine motor skills

ple have claimed that there are satanic or otherwise
harmful lyrics embedded backwards in some rock music.
In most cases, when people first listen to the music backwards, they hear absolutely nothing that resembles
speech. When somebody tells them to listen for particular words or phrases, however, people report hearing satanic words. As with illusory contours, the words are not
really there until someone’s attention is focused appropriately on a particular set of sounds.
Further Reading
Dance, Sandy. Picture Interpretation: A Symbolic Approach.
River Edge, NJ: World Scientific, 1995.
Pavel, Monique. Fundamentals of Pattern Recognition 2nd ed.
New York: M. Dekker, 1993.

Fine motor skills
Skills involving control of the fingers, hands, and
arms.

Fine motor skill involves deliberate and controlled
movements requiring both muscle development and maturation of the central nervous system. Although newborn infants can move their hands and arms, these motions are reflexes that a baby cannot consciously start or
stop. The development of fine motor skills is crucial to
an infant’s ability to experience and learn about the
world and thus plays a central role in the development of
intelligence. Like gross motor skills, fine motor skills
develop in an orderly progression, but at an uneven pace
characterized by both rapid spurts and, at times, frustrating but harmless delays. In most cases, difficulty with
certain fine motor skills is temporary and does not indicate a serious problem. However, medical help should be
sought if a child is significantly behind his peers in multiple aspects of fine motor development or if he regresses, losing previously acquired skills.

Infancy
The hands of a newborn infant are closed most of
the time and, like the rest of her body, she has little control over them. If her palm is touched, she will make a
very tight fist, but this is an unconscious reflex action
called the Darwinian reflex, and it disappears within two
to three months. Similarly, the infant will grasp at an object placed in her hand, but without any awareness that
she is doing so. At some point her hand muscles will
relax, and she will drop the object, equally unaware that
she has let it fall. Babies may begin flailing at objects
that interest them by two weeks of age but cannot grasp
them. By eight weeks, they begin to discover and play
250

with their hands, at first solely by touch, and then, at
about three months, by sight as well. At this age, however, the deliberate grasp remains largely undeveloped.
Hand-eye coordination begins to develop between
the ages of 2 and 4 months, inaugurating a period of
trial-and-error practice at sighting objects and grabbing
at them. At four or five months, most infants can grasp
an object that is within reach, looking only at the object
and not at their hands. Referred to as “top-level reaching,” this achievement is considered an important milestone in fine motor development. At the age of six
months, infants can typically hold on to a small block
briefly, and many have started banging objects. Although
their grasp is still clumsy, they have acquired a fascination with grabbing small objects and trying to put them
in their mouths. At first, babies will indiscriminately try
to grasp things that cannot be grasped, such as pictures
in a book, as well as those that can, such as a rattle or
ball. During the latter half of the first year, they begin exploring and testing objects before grabbing, touching
them with an entire hand and, eventually, poking them
with an index finger.
One of the most significant fine motor accomplishments is the pincer grip, which typically appears between the ages of 12 and 15 months. Initially, an infant
can only hold an object, such as a rattle, in his palm,
wrapping his fingers (including the thumb) around it
from one side, an awkward position called the palmar
grasp, which makes it difficult to hold on to and manipulate the object. By the age of eight to ten months, a finger grasp begins, but objects can only be gripped with all
four fingers pushing against the thumb, which still
makes it awkward to grab small objects. The development of the pincer grip—the ability to hold objects between the thumb and index finger—gives the infant a
more sophisticated ability to grasp and manipulate objects, and also to deliberately drop them. By about the
age of one, an infant can drop an object into a receptacle,
compare objects held in both hands, stack objects, and
nest them within each other.

Toddlerhood
Toddlers develop the ability to manipulate objects
with increasing sophistication, including using their fingers to twist dials, pull strings, push levers, turn book
pages, and use crayons to produce crude scribbles. Dominance of either the right or left hand usually emerges
during this period as well. Toddlers also add a new dimension to touching and manipulating objects by simultaneously being able to name them. Instead of only random scribbles, their drawings include patterns, such as
circles. Their play with blocks is more elaborate and pur-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Fine motor skills

poseful than that of infants, and they can stack as many
as six blocks. They are also able to fold a sheet of paper
in half (with supervision), string large beads, manipulate
snap toys, play with clay, unwrap small objects, and
pound pegs.

Preschool
The more delicate tasks facing preschool children,
such as handling silverware or tying shoelaces, represent
more of a challenge than most of the gross motor activities learned during this period of development. The central nervous system is still in the process of maturing sufficiently for complex messages from the brain to get to
the child’s fingers. In addition, small muscles tire more
easily than large ones, and the short, stubby fingers of
preschoolers make delicate or complicated tasks more
difficult. Finally, gross motor skills call for energy,
which is boundless in preschoolers, while fine motor
skills require patience, which is in shorter supply. Thus,
there is considerable variation in fine motor development
among this age group.
By the age of three, many children have good control of a pencil. Three-year-olds can often draw a circle,
although their attempts at drawing people are still very
primitive. It is common for four-year-olds to be able to
use scissors, copy geometric shapes and letters, button
large buttons, and form clay shapes with two or three
parts. Some can print their own names in capital letters.
A human figure drawn by a four-year-old is typically a
head atop two legs with one arm radiating from each leg.

School age
By the age of five, most children have clearly advanced beyond the fine motor skill development of the
preschool age. They can draw recognizably human figures with facial features and legs connected to a distinct
trunk. Besides drawing, five-year-olds can also cut,
paste, and trace shapes. They can fasten visible buttons
(as opposed to those at the back of clothing), and many
can tie bows, including shoelace bows. Their right- or
left- handedness is well established, and they use the
preferred hand for writing and drawing.

Encouraging fine motor development
Encouraging gross motor skills requires a safe, open
play space, peers to interact with, and some adult supervision. Nurturing the development of fine motor skills is
considerably more complicated. Helping a child succeed
in fine motor tasks requires planning, time, and a variety
of play materials. Fine motor development can be encouraged by activities that youngsters enjoy, including

This six-month-old has mastered the fine motor skills
necessary for picking up an object and guiding it to her
mouth. (Patrick Donehue. Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced
with permission.)

crafts, puzzles, and playing with building blocks. Helping parents with everyday domestic activities, such as
baking, can be fun for the child in addition to developing
fine motor skills. For example, stirring batter provides a
good workout for the hand and arm muscles, and cutting
and spooning out cookie dough requires hand-eye coordination. Even a computer keyboard and mouse can provide practice in finger, hand, and hand-eye coordination.
Because the development of fine motor skills plays a
crucial role in school readiness and cognitive development, it is considered an important part of the preschool
curriculum. The Montessori schools, in particular, were
early leaders in emphasizing the significance of fine
motor tasks and the use of learning aids such as pegboards and puzzles in early childhood education. The
development of fine motor skills in children of low-income parents, who often lack the time or knowledge required to foster these abilities, is a key ingredient in the
success of programs such as Head Start.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

251

Fixation

See also Gross motor skills
Further Reading
Eckert, Helen M. Motor Development. 3rd ed. Indianapolis,
IN: Benchmark Press, 1987.
Lerch, Harold A., and Christine B. Stopka. Developmental
Motor Activities for All Children: From Theory to Practice. Dubuque, IA: Brown and Benchmark, 1992.
Thomas, Jerry R., ed. Motor Development in Childhood and
Adolescence. Minneapolis: Burgess Publishing Co., 1984.

Further Reading

Fixation
An intense psychological association with a past
event or series of events that triggers certain feelings or behaviors in a person when confronted
with similar events or series of events.

Sigmund Freud theorized that the developmental
stages of infancy and early childhood chart our lives in
ways that are difficult to change. He believed that most
adult neuroses could be attributed to a fixation developed
during one of these stages of early life. Freud was especially concerned about how these stages were related to
sexual development in later life, and in this he was, and
continues to be, quite controversial. In his time, it was
considered by many to be outlandish that an infant sucking on her mother’s breast was experiencing sexual gratification, yet Freud classified it as such and composed a
theory of psychosexual development.
Freud’s theory of psychosexual development suggests that children pass through several stages in their
earliest years. These stages are the oral stage, the anal
stage, the phallic stage, the latency stage, and genital
stage. During each stage, children learn to gratify themselves (Freud would say sexually) via distinct patterns of
behavior. During the oral stage, for instance, children
learn that the highest level of physical gratification occurs through oral stimulation. (They feed by sucking,
they routinely place objects in their mouths, etc.) It was
Freud’s view that during any one of these stages a person
could become fixated—that is, they could be so gratified
or, on the other hand, so unfulfilled, that they are marked
for life by this fixation. Someone who has a fixation at
the oral stage of development, for instance, might suck
his or her thumb, eat or drink excessively, chew pencils,
or smoke cigarettes. Adults fixated during this period of
development are also thought to be inclined toward
clinging, dependent relationships. Those fixated during
the anal phase of psychosexual development are typically thought of as being overly controlling and obsessed
with neatness or cleanliness.
252

Freud also considered regression closely linked to
fixation. In his famous Introductory Lectures on PsychoAnalysis, he spoke of human development as a journey
into new territory, much like an early migration of primitive peoples into new territory. He states that as people
migrated into new, unexplored territory, certain members
of the party might stop along the way at a place that offered them the prospect of a good life. These stopping
points would be analogous to the fixations people develop in early life, attaching themselves to a period of safety and security before the entire journey of life is fully
accomplished.

Freud, Sigmund. Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis.
New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1966.

John Hurley Flavell
1928American developmental and cognitive psychologist known for his studies of role-taking in children.

John Hurley Flavell is a founder of social cognitive
developmental psychology. His research on “role-taking,” the cognitive skills that children require in order to
understand and accept the roles of others, was a major
contribution to developmental psychology. Flavell was
one of the first psychologists to study the ways in which
children think about their thinking processes and the
human mind. He is the author of more than 120 books
and articles and was an advisory editor of the journal
Cognitive Psychology. In 1984, Flavell received the Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award of the American Psychological Association (APA). He is the Anne
T. and Robert M. Bass Professor in the School of Humanities and Sciences at Stanford University.
Flavell was born in 1928 in Rockland, Massachusetts, the son of Paul I. and Anne O’Brien Flavell. His father was a civil engineer who was unemployed for a long
period during the Great Depression. Thus, Flavell and his
two sisters experienced economic hardship during childhood. After graduating from high school in 1945, Flavell
joined the Army for two years. He then attended Northeastern University in Boston and graduated in 1951. Because of financial considerations, Flavell chose to enter
the psychology graduate program at Clark University in
Worcester, Massachusetts, rather than Harvard University. He earned his M.A. degree the following year and his
Ph.D. in 1955. Flavell’s training at Clark stressed psychoanalysis and the developmental psychology of Heinz
Werner. In 1954, Flavell married Eleanor R. Wood, who

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Introduces Piaget into American
psychology
Flavell’s first position was as a clinical psychologist
at a Veterans Administration Hospital in Colorado. However he left there a year later to accept a position at the
University of Rochester in New York, first as a clinical
associate and then as an assistant professor of psychology. He was promoted to associate professor in 1960. Although Flavell first undertook to write a book on theories
of developmental psychology, he soon switched to a
major study of the work of Jean Piaget, publishing The
Developmental Psychology of Jean Piaget in 1963. This
was the first major work in English on the research and
theories of Piaget and marked the start of the modern science of cognitive development. That same year, Flavell
traveled to Paris for additional studies at the Sorbonne.
Flavell’s research at Rochester focused on children’s
understanding of the roles of others and on children’s
communication skills and developing memory skills. He
first evaluated the skills needed for role-taking, the understanding of what another person sees, knows, needs,
and intends to do. He found that children whose parents
talk to them often about emotions and feelings develop
these skills at an earlier age. In 1965, he moved to the Institute of Child Development at the University of Minnesota as a professor of psychology. There he continued
his work on the cognitive development of children.
While researching the development of memory skills in
children, Flavell found that children need to understand
the concept of memory before they can develop skills for
utilizing and improving memory. He called this knowledge “metamemory.”
Flavell was president of the APA’s Division of Developmental Psychology in 1970. In 1976, he became a
professor of psychology at Stanford University. There he
continued his involvement with professional organizations. He served as president of the Society for Research
in Child Development from 1979 to 1981. In 1986
Flavell was presented with the G. Stanley Hall Award of
the APA.

ory of “metacognition” or “metaconsciousness,” which
is a child’s understanding about the workings of the
human mind and her own thought processes. In 1995, the
Flavells and Greene published Young Children’s Knowledge about Thinking. In their research, they have found
that preschoolers understand that thinking is a human,
mental activity and that it can involve things that are in
the past or in the present, real or imaginary. They distinguish thinking from other activities such as talking, feeling, seeing, or knowing. However preschoolers greatly
underestimate the amount that they and others think, and
they have difficulty perceiving that other people think. In
other words, Flavell has found that, although preschoolers know that rocks do not think, they also don’t believe
that their parents think all that much.
Throughout his career, Flavell’s books have received
critical acclaim for both their scholarship and their lively
and entertaining prose. Flavell is on the editorial board
of the Journal of Cognition and Development and continues to teach and advise students.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Coombs, Karen. “John Flavell: ‘The Development of Children’s Knowledge About the Mind’.” The Bing Times
(June 1994). http://www.stanford.edu/dept/bingschool/rsrchart/flavell1.htm.
Flavell, John H. Cognitive Development. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1977. 3rd ed. with Patricia A. Miller
and Scott A. Miller, 1993.
Flavell, John H., Frances L. Green, and Eleanor R. Flavell.
“Development of Children’s Awareness of Their Own
Thoughts.” Journal of Cognition and Development 1
(2000): 97.
“Preschoolers Don’t Think Much About Thinking.” Stanford
News (1 January 1994). http://www.stanford.edu/dept/
news/relaged/940101Arc4532.html.
Rai, Deepa. “Interview with Professor John Flavell.” The Bing
Times (December 1995). http://www.stanford.edu/dept/
bingschool/rsrchart/flavell2.htm.

Forensic psychology
The application of psychology to lawmaking, law
enforcement, the examination of witnesses, and
the treatment of the criminal; also known as legal
psychology.

Studies metacognition in children
Since his arrival at Stanford, Flavell and his longtime research associates, his wife, Ellie Flavell, and
Frances L. Greene, have studied preschoolers at the Bing
Nursery School on the Stanford campus. They have also
studied elementary-school and college students. In recent years, Flavell has researched and developed his the-

Forensic psychologists often work within the judicial system in such diverse areas as determining an inmate’s readiness for parole; evaluation of rehabilitation

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

253

Forensic psychology

would share his research interests throughout much of his
career. The couple have two children.

Forensic psychology

programs; criminal competency; tort liability and damages; eyewitness testimony and evidence; jury selection;
and police training. Forensic psychology may also be
employed in other areas of jurisprudence, including
patent and trademark disputes, divorce and custody
cases, product liability, and taxation.
Forensic psychologists advise their clients in several
ways, including diagnostic appraisals, which may be
used to determine the competency of the client to stand
trial, and contributing to defense strategy. They are also
called upon to render clinically based opinions on a wide
variety of issues arising from their diagnoses, such as the
best interests of a child in a custody case, or the readiness of a prisoner for parole. Finally, forensic psychologists advise on the prognosis and treatment of the individuals under evaluation. In most cases, they obtain a
“forensic history,” which includes hospital records, police reports, witness statements, and provide relevant research. Besides submitting reports on their findings, they
are sometimes required to testify in court.
In a typical criminal case, the forensic psychologist
may be hired by a defense attorney to evaluate the defendant. (A case will commonly entail the services of a psychologist, for example, if an insanity defense is being
considered.) The psychologist is briefed on the circumstances of the crime and examines records detailing the
defendant’s previous criminal record and any history of
mental or emotional problems and treatment. In pretrial
preparations, the psychologist may administer personality and intelligence tests to the defendant. Afterwards,
the psychologist reports the evaluation findings to the attorney and may be asked to testify at pretrial hearings,
the trial itself, or the sentencing.
The most common type of civil case in which a psychologist may be consulted are lawsuits to recover damages for injuries resulting from car accidents. The first
task is to become familiarized with the case, which includes an examination of the client’s medical records relating to the accident, as well as his or her previous medical history and any records that indicate the client’s
level of functioning at work or in other settings prior to
the accident. The psychologist must then evaluate the
plaintiff’s emotional or cognitive problems, being careful to distinguish those problems caused by the accident
from any preexisting ones.
Forensic psychologists are regularly consulted in
child custody cases. In many situations it is the court itself that hires a psychologist to evaluate both parents,
children, and other relevant family members. These
evaluations may involve visits to the home of each parent, which provide additional information on the relationship between parent and child and on a child’s possi254

ble future environment. Such interviews, by their relatively informal nature, serve to facilitate communication
with the child.
In addition to providing expert consultation on a
contractual basis, forensic psychologists are also employed by community mental health centers, police departments, and prisons. They may train police officers to
handle diverse situations like domestic abuse, suicide
threats, and hostage crises, and how to control crowds.
Those who work in prisons provide clinical services to
inmates. In addition to the applied work performed by
forensic psychologists in these and other settings, some
members of the field specialize solely in research, investigating areas such as eyewitness and expert testimony,
jury selection, and the jury decision process.
Regardless of specialty, forensic psychologists must
be familiar with relevant case law, respect issues of confidentiality, and continually keep apprised of new research in the field. Joint Ph.D.-J.D. programs have been
in existence since the early 1970s. It is also possible to
earn a Ph.D. in psychology with a specialization in
forensic or correctional psychology, and the curricula of
graduate programs in psychology include a growing
number of law-related courses.
Organizations for forensic psychologists include the
American Association for Correctional Psychology and
the American Psychology-Law Society. Forensic Psychology has had its own division in the American Psychological Association since 1980 (Division 4). The
American Board of Forensic Psychology has provided
referrals to qualified professionals in the field since its
establishment in 1978 as well as promoting the discipline of forensic psychology to the general public. The
Board certifies practitioners who have amassed at least
1,000 hours of experience within a five-year period. Applicants must also submit a work sample and undergo a
three-hour examination administered by their peers.
Further Reading
Cooke, Gerald, ed. The Role of the Forensic Psychologist.
Springfield, IL: Thomas, 1980.
Criminal Justice and Behavior. Volume 1-, March 1974- .
Law and Human Behavior. Volume 1-, 1977- .
Lipsitt, Paul D. and Dennis Sales. New Directions in Psycholegal Research. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1980.
Schwitzgebel, Robert L., and R. Kirkland Schwitzgebel. Law
and Psychological Practice. New York: Wiley, 1980.

Further Information
American Association for Correctional Psychology (Formerly:
American Association of Correctional Psychologists).
West Virginia University, College of Graduate Studies Institute, Morgantown, West Virginia 25112, (304)
766–1929.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Viktor E. Frank

American Psychology-Law Society. University of Massachusetts Medical Center, Department of Psychology, 55 Lake
Avenue N., Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, (508)
856–3625.

Forgetting curve
The general, predictable pattern of the process of
forgetting learned information.

Psychologists have been interested in the processes
of learning and forgetting since the early days of the discipline. The researcher who pioneered this field, Hermann Ebbinghaus (1850-1909), invented the nonsense
syllable in order to be able to assess “pure” learning, that
is, learning free of meaning, and the rate at which we
forget. He served as his own subject and learned an incredible number of lists of nonsense syllables. He used
material with little or no meaning because he was aware
that learning new information is influenced by what we
already know. He decided to create learning situations
that were free of prior knowledge.
The way that we forget is highly predictable, following what psychologists call the forgetting curve. When
we acquire knowledge, much of our forgetting occurs
right away. Ebbinghaus discovered that a significant
amount of information was forgotten within twenty minutes of learning; over half of the nonsense material he
learned was forgotten within an hour. Although he forgot
within a day almost two thirds of the material he learned,
retention of the material did not decline much beyond
that period. In other words, if information is retained for
a day, the knowledge was there to stay.
Ebbinghaus’s forgetting curve is actually much more
dramatic than a forgetting curve would be for meaningful
material. When the learner is able to connect new information with old information, he still might forget what
was learned, but the amount and speed of forgetting is
likely to be less than what Ebbinghaus experienced.
See also Ebbinghaus, Hermann

Viktor E. Frankl
1905-1997
Jewish psychiatrist and author who developed the
discipline of logotherapy.

Born March 26, 1905, in Vienna, Austria-Hungary
(present-day Austria); died September 2, 1997, in Vi-

Viktor Frankl (DIZ Munchen GmbH. Reproduced with
permission.)

enna, Austria, of heart failure. Viktor E. Frankl, a Jewish psychiatrist and author, drew on his experiences as
a survivor of the Holocaust (Nazi Germany’s campaign
to exterminate the Jewish population of Europe during
World War II) to develop the discipline of logotherapy,
a form of psychotherapy that, by stressing the need to
find meaning even in the most tragic circumstances,
offered solace to millions of readers of his classic
work, Man’s Search for Meaning: An Introduction to
Logotherapy.
Frankl grew up in Vienna, the birthplace of modern
psychiatry and home of the renowned psychiatrists Sigmund Freud and Alfred Adler. A brilliant student,
Frankl became interested in psychiatry in his teens. At
age 16 he began writing to Freud, and on one occasion
sent him a short paper, which Freud regarded so highly
that he passed it on to the International Journal of Psychoanalysis, where it was published three years later.
Frankl earned a medical degree from the University of
Vienna in 1930 and was put in charge of a Vienna hospital ward for the treatment of females who had attempted
suicide. When Germany seized control of Austria eight
years later, the Nazis made Frankl head of the Rothschild
Hospital, the only Jewish hospital that was allowed to remain open in Vienna.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

255

Waldo David Frank

After taking power in Austria, the Nazis began removing the Jews of Vienna to the death camps that had
been set up in Eastern Europe. Frankl was deported to
the Theresienstadt camp near Prague in January 1942,
one month after marrying Mathilde Grosser. He was later
sent to the Auschwitz camp in Poland, where the camp
doctor, Josef Mengele, was supervising the division of
the incoming prisoners into two lines. Those in the line
moving left were to go to the gas chambers, while those
in the line moving right were to be spared. Frankl was
directed to join the line moving left, but managed to save
his life by slipping into the other line without being noticed. Other members of his family were not so fortunate, however, and by war’s end Frankl had lost his pregnant wife, his parents, and a brother.
Before the war Frankl had begun to develop a theory
that psychological health depends on finding meaning in
one’s life. The death camps, he wrote, confirmed his initial insights in a fashion he could never have anticipated.
In the camps one lost everything, he once commented as
quoted by Holcomb B. Noble in the New York Times, except “the last of the human freedoms, to choose one’s attitude in any given set of circumstances, to choose one’s
own way.” Prisoners who allowed themselves to be overwhelmed by despair, who gave up their freedom to
choose, often descended into paralytic apathy and depression. The key to helping such people was to show
them how they could find meaning even in the face of
unimaginable horror. Meaning might consist of holding
onto pleasant memories, or helping other prisoners turn
away from suicide. Every prisoner had a moral choice to
make: to surrender one’s inner self to the Nazis, or to
find the meaning in one’s life that would give one the
strength to go on.
On returning to Vienna after Germany’s defeat in
1945, Frankl, who had secretly been keeping a record of
his observations in the camps on scraps of paper taken
from the Nazis, published a book in German setting out
his ideas on logotherapy (a term derived from the Greek
word for “meaning”). This was translated into English in
1959, and in a revised and enlarged edition appeared as
Man’s Search for Meaning: An Introduction to Logotherapy in 1963. By the time of his death, Frankl’s book had
been translated into 24 languages and reprinted 73 times
and had long been used as a standard text in high school
and university courses in psychology, philosophy, and
theology. According to the Los Angeles Times, Frankl’s
theory of a psychotherapy that emphasized “the will to
meaning” was described as “the Third Vienna School of
Psychotherapy,” the first being Freud’s, which emphasized “the will to pleasure,” and the second being
Adler’s, which emphasized “the will to power.” It exerted an important influence on psychiatrists of varying
256

theoretical perspectives, who often recommended Frankl’s book to despairing patients who could find no value
in their lives.
In 1947, after confirming that his first wife had died
in the camps, Frankl married Eleonore Schwindt, who
survived him, as did a daughter, Dr. Gabrielle FranklVesely. Frankl’s postwar career was spent as a professor
of neurology and psychiatry in Vienna, where he taught
until he was 85. He was also chief of neurology at the Vienna Polyclinic Hospital for 25 years. Frankl received
numerous honorary doctorates, wrote over 30 books, became the first non-American to be awarded the American Psychiatric Association’s prestigious Oskar Pfister
Prize, and was a visiting professor at Harvard, Stanford,
and other universities. His hobbies included mountain
climbing, and at 67 he obtained his pilot’s license.
Frankl’s message that “man is capable of defying
and braving even the worst conditions conceivable,” as
quoted in the Chicago Tribune, resonated with people
around the world. In a 1991 survey of general-interest
readers conducted by the Library of Congress and the
Book of the Month Club, Man’s Search for Meaning was
ranked among the ten books that had most influenced the
respondents. For them, and for millions of others, Frankl’s writings were an inspiration and a reminder that it is
“essential to keep practicing the art of living,” as quoted
by Noble, even when life seems most hopeless.
Howard Baker
Further Reading
Chicago Tribune, http://www.chicago.tribune.com (September
4, 1997)
Los Angeles Times, http://www.latimes.com (September 4,
1997)
New York Times, http://www.nytimes.com (September 4, 1997)
Times (London), http://www.the-times.co.uk (September 30,
1997).
“Viktor E(mil)Frankl,” Contemporary Authors,
http://galenet.gale.com (November 10, 1997)
Washington Post, September 4, 1997, p. B06.

Waldo David Frank
1889-1967
American author and activist whose ideology influenced many intellectuals.

Once considered among the most influential of
twentieth-century intellectuals, Waldo Frank is now
largely forgotten. This is not for lack of writings; Frank

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In his novels Frank tended to advocate social and
political reform. His novels include Unwelcome Man
(1917), City Block (1922), and The Death and Birth of
David Markand (1934). Frank, who described himself as
a “naturalistic mystic,” was an admirer of Freud, and in
many of his works he injected his own understanding of
psychoanalysis. Thus, although not a psychoanalyst
himself, he was able to help popularize analysis through
his works. Books on politics by Frank include The Rediscovery of America (1929), America Hispania (1931),
Birth of the World (1951), and The Prophetic Island: A
Portrait of Cuba (1961).
Frank had one son with Naumburg and two children
with his second wife, Alma Magoon (whom he married
in 1927). By the time he died in January 1967, he was
largely forgotten in the United States, although his works
and theories flourished in other countries, especially in
South America.
George A. Milite
Waldo Frank (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with
permission.)

wrote 14 novels, 18 volumes of social history, and numerous articles for literary and political magazines. During the 1920s, Frank was part of an artistic circle that included such artists as Alfred Stieglitz, Van Wyck Brooks,
Countee Cullen, and Jean Toomer. His first wife (19161924) was Margaret Naumburg, who pioneered art therapy. He was particularly admired in Spain, France, and
Latin America, where his writings are still well known.
Waldo David Frank was born in Long Branch, New
Jersey, on August 25, 1889. His parents, Julius and
Helen Rosenberg Frank, provided their son with a comfortable existence in which his intellectual curiosity was
stimulated. A voracious reader, he was expelled from his
high school in his senior year for refusing to take a required course on Shakespeare because he felt that he
knew more about Shakespeare than the teacher did. At
around the same time he completed his first novel, which
was never published.
After a year in boarding school in Switzerland, Frank
enrolled at Yale University, where he graduated with a
combined bachelor’s and master’s degree in 1911. During
his years at Yale, Frank became attracted to radical ideas
and contributed to socialist journals such as The Liberator
and New Masses. He also wrote a drama column for the

Further Reading
Current Biography, 1940. New York: H.W. Wilson Co., 1940.

Free association
One of the basic techniques of classic psychoanalysis in which the patient says everything that
comes to mind without editing or censoring.

The use of free association was pioneered by Sigmund Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis, after he
became dissatisfied with the hypnosis-based “cathartic”
treatment of hysterical symptoms practiced by his colleague Josef Breuer (1842-1925), through which patients were able to recall traumatic experiences while
under hypnosis and express the original emotions that
had been repressed and forgotten. Freud found the limitations of hypnosis unsatisfactory and began the task of
finding another similarly cathartic treatment method. By
the late 1890s, he had worked out the essential components of his system of psychoanalysis, including the use
of free association as a method of exploring the unconscious, identifying repressed memories and the reasons
for their repression, and enabling patients to know themselves more fully. The patient, relaxed on a couch in his
office, was directed to engage in a free association of
ideas that could yield useful insights and to reveal

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

257

Free association

local paper. Upon graduation, he wrote some pieces for
the New York Times, traveled through Europe for a year,
and tried unsuccessfully to launch a literary magazine.

Free-recall learning

frankly whatever came to mind. Freud, seated behind the
patient, would listen to and interpret these associations.
For free association to be effective, it is important
for the patient to share his or her thoughts freely without
regard to whether they are logical, consistent, or socially
appropriate. Even thoughts that seem trivial, bizarre, or
embarrassing should be reported without hesitation. Initially, free association can be difficult, because people
are accustomed to editing their thoughts, presenting
them in a logical, linear fashion, and leaving out potentially embarrassing material. However, the technique becomes more comfortable with practice and with encouragement by the therapist. The more closely the patient
can replicate his or her stream of consciousness, the
more likely it is that defenses will be lowered and repressed material brought to light. Besides the content of
the thoughts themselves, the connections between them
may also offer important information to the therapist.
Further Reading

Frequency (auditory)

Freud, Sigmund. An Outline of Psychoanalysis. New York:
W.W. Norton, 1989.

Technical definition of the range of sounds audible
to humans.

Free-recall learning
The presentation of material to the learner with the
subsequent task of recalling as much as possible
about the material without any cues.

A typical experiment involving the use of words as
stimuli may include unrelated or related words, single
or multiple presentations of the words, and single or
multiple tests involving memory. In a free-recall test,
the learner organizes the information by memory, and
the process of recall often reveals the mental processes
that the learner uses. For example, words positioned at
the beginning and the end of a list are most likely to be
remembered, a phenomenon called the serial position
effect. Further, any unusual stimuli have a greater
chance of being recalled, a phenomenon called the von
Restorff effect.
Learners tend to organize related material in ways
that enhance recall. One process, clustering, involves
placing words that are associated with one another in one
“location” in memory. The advantage of clustering is
that recall is easier because the person can search one
mental “location” and find several stimuli. The disadvantage of this strategy is that people may erroneously think
that certain stimuli occurred because they are associated
with the clustered items. Such falsely remembered words
are referred to as intrusions.
258

As a rule, an individual can remember an average of
about seven stimuli in a typical free recall task. This generally translates into a total of five to nine items. Psychologists refer to the “magic number seven, plus or
minus two,” as the amount that people can remember
without engaging in rehearsal or other memory-enhancing tactics. Researchers have discovered that people can
recall about seven items, but the “items” are not limited
to words. If given a list of book titles, for example, a
learner might be able to recall about seven titles, even
though each title consists of multiple words. The critical
element is the number of meaningful units, not simply
the number of words. If the learners have to recall the
stimuli in the same order in which they were presented,
the results are less successful than if the learners can retrieve the stimuli in their own preferred order.

Humans can detect sound waves with frequencies
that vary from approximately 20 to 20,000 Hz. Probably
of greatest interest to psychologists are the frequencies
around 500-2,000 Hz, the range in which sounds important to speech typically occur. Humans are most responsive to sounds between 1,000 and 5,000 Hz, and are not
likely to hear very low or very high frequencies unless
they are fairly intense. For example, the average person
is approximately 100 times more sensitive to a sound at
3,000 Hz than to one at 100 Hz. People can best differentiate between two similar pitches when they are between 1,000 and 5,000 Hz.
The relationship between frequency and pitch is predictable but not always simple. That is, as frequency increases, pitch becomes higher. At the same time, if the
frequency is doubled, the resulting sound does not have a
pitch twice as high. In fact, if one listens to a sound at a
given frequency, then a second sound at twice the frequency, the pitch would have increased by one octave in
pitch. Each doubling of frequencies involves a one-octave
change, for example, the Middle C note on a piano has a
frequency of 261.2; the C note one octave higher is 522.4,
a change of 261.2 Hz. The next C note on the piano has a
frequency of 1046.4 Hz, or a change of 523.2 Hz.
When an individual hears a complex sound consisting of many different wavelengths, such as a human
voice, music, and most sounds in nature, the ear separates the sound into its different frequencies. This separation begins in the inner ear, specifically the basilar

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The ability to hear declines with age, although the loss
is greatest for high frequency sounds. At age 70, for example, sensitivity to sounds at 1,000 Hz is maintained, whereas sensitivity to sounds at 8,000 Hz is markedly diminished.
As many as 75 percent of people over 70 years of age have
experienced some deterioration in their hearing.

Frequency distribution
Systematic representation of data, arranged so that
the observed frequency of occurrence of data
falling within certain ranges, classes, or categories,
is shown.

When data is presented in a frequency distribution,
the objective is to show the number of times a particular
value or range of values occurs. Common forms of presentation of frequency distribution include the frequency
polygon, the bar graph, and the frequency curve, which
associate a number (the frequency) with each range, class,
or category of data. A grouped frequency distribution is a
kind of frequency distribution in which groups of ranges,
classes, or categories are presented. Grouped frequency
distributions are generally used when the number of different ranges, classes, or categories is large. A cumulative
frequency distribution is a representation in which each
successive division includes all of the items in previous divisions (so that, for example, the last division includes all
of the data in the entire distribution). A probability distribution is similar to a frequency distribution, except that in a
probability distribution the observed probability of occurrence is associated with each range, class, or category. The
sum of the probabilities in a probability distribution is
one, while the sum of the frequencies in a frequency distribution is the total number of data items.

Anna Freud
1895-1982
Austrian psychoanalyst and pioneer in the field of
child psychoanalysis; daughter of psychoanalyst
Sigmund Freud.

A seminal figure in the field of child psychoanalysis and development, Anna Freud was born in Vienna,
Austria, the youngest child of Sigmund Freud. She was
educated at private schools in Vienna, and at age 19
began two years of study to become a teacher. As the
youngest of six children, she became her father’s lifelong
traveling companion and student. When Freud was 23
years old, she underwent psychoanalysis, with her father
as analyst. Despite the fact that psychoanalysis at that
time—and until around the mid-1920s—was less formal
than it has become, it was nonetheless unusual for a
child to become the patient, or analysand, of a parent.
Anna Freud’s own interest was in children and their
development. Influenced by her father’s psychoanalytic
theories, she believed that children experience a series of
stages of normal psychological development. She also
felt strongly that, in order to work with children, psycho-

Further Reading
Berman, Simeon M. Mathematical Statistics: An Introduction
Based on the Normal Distribution. Scranton, PA: Intext
Educational Publishers, 1971.
Peavy, J. Virgil. Descriptive Statistics: Measures of Central
Tendency and Dispersion. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Dept. of
Health and Human Services/Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, 1981.

Anna Freud (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with
permission.)

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

259

Anna Freud

membrane within the cochlea. The basilar membrane is a
strip of tissue that is wide at one end and narrow at the
other. When the ear responds to a low frequency sound,
the entire length of the basilar membrane vibrates; for a
high frequency sound, the movement of the membrane is
more restricted to locations nearer the narrow end. Thus,
a person can hear the different frequencies (and their associated pitches) as separate sounds.

Sigmund Freud

analysts need a thorough understanding of these stages,
knowledge she believed was best acquired through direct
observation of children. With Dorothy Burlingham,
Freud founded a nursery school for poor children in Vienna, becoming an international leader in treating children’s mental illnesses. Freud turned her attention to the
study of the ego, especially in adolescence, publishing
The Ego and the Mechanisms of Defense (1936) in honor
of her father’s 80th birthday.
After the Nazis took control in Austria in 1938, the
Freuds emigrated to London, England, where Sigmund
Freud died a year later. In 1947, Freud and Burlingham
established the Hampstead Child Therapy Course and
Clinic in London, which provided training opportunities
for individuals interested in the psychological and emotional development of children. From the 1950s until her
death, psychoanalysts, child psychologists, and teachers
worldwide sought opportunities to hear Freud lecture,
and to benefit from the insights she developed from a lifetime of working with children. Freud’s other writings include The Psychoanalytical Treatment of Children
(1946), Normality and Pathology in Childhood (1965),
and the seven-volume Writings of Anna Freud (1973).
Further Reading
Coles, Robert. Anna Freud: The Dream of Psychoanalysis.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company,
Inc., 1992.

Sigmund Freud (The Library of Congress. Reproduced by
permission.)

Sigmund Freud
1856-1939
Austrian neurologist and the founder of psychoanalysis.

Sigmund Freud was born in Moravia. When he was
three years old, his family moved to Vienna, the city
where he was to live until the last year of his life. At the
age of 17, Freud entered the University of Vienna’s medical school, where he pursued a variety of research interests. Although primarily interested in physiological research, Freud was forced to enter into clinical practice
due to the difficulty of obtaining a university appointment—aggravated, in his case, by anti-Semitic attitudes
and policies. After additional independent research and
clinical work at the General Hospital of Vienna, Freud
entered private practice, specializing in the treatment of
patients with neurological and hysterical disorders.
During this period, Freud learned about his colleague Josef Breuer’s “cathartic” treatment of hysterical
symptoms, which disappeared when a patient recalled
traumatic experiences while under hypnosis and was
260

able to express original emotions that had been repressed
and forgotten. Pursuing this idea further, Freud spent several months in France studying Jean-Martin Charcot’s
method of treating hysteria by hypnosis. Upon his return
to Vienna, Freud began the task of finding a similar
method of treatment that did not require hypnosis, whose
limitations he found unsatisfactory. In addition to learning by observing the symptoms and experiences of his
patients, Freud also engaged in a rigorous self-analysis
based on his own dreams. In 1895, he and Breuer published Studies on Hysteria, a landmark text in the history
of psychoanalysis, and in 1900 Freud’s own groundbreaking work, The Interpretation of Dreams, appeared.
By this time, Freud had worked out the essential
components of his system of psychoanalysis, including
the use of free association and catharsis as a method of
exploring the unconscious, identifying repressed memories and the reasons for their repression, and enabling patients to know themselves more fully. The patient, relaxed on a couch in his office, was directed to engage in
a free association of ideas that could yield useful insights, and was asked to reveal frankly whatever came to
mind. Through both his work with patients and his own
self-analysis, Freud came to believe that mental disorders which have no apparent physiological cause are

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Freud published The Psychopathology of Everyday
Life in 1904 and three more works the following year, including Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, which
set forth his ideas about the development of the human
sex instinct, or libido, including his theory of childhoodsexuality and the Oedipus complex. While recognition
from the scientific community and the general public was
slow in coming, by the early 1900s Freud had attracted a
circle of followers, including Carl Jung, Alfred Adler,
and Otto Rank (1884-1939), who held weekly discussion meetings at his home and later became known as the
Vienna Psychological Society. Although Jung and Adler
were eventually to break with Freud, forming their own
theories and schools of analysis, their early support
helped establish psychoanalysis as a movement of international importance. In 1909, Freud was invited to speak
at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts, by its
president, the distinguished psychologist G. Stanley Hall
(1844-1924), and was awarded an honorary doctorate.
After World War I, Freud gained increasing fame as psychoanalysis became fashionable in intellectual circles and
was popularized by the media.
Freud contended that the human personality is governed by forces called “instincts” or “drives.” Later, he
came to believe in the existence of a death instinct, or
death wish (Thanatos), directed either outward as aggression or inward as self-destructive behavior (noted
mainly as repetition compulsions). He constructed a
comprehensive theory on the structure of the psyche,
which he viewed as divided into three parts. The id, corresponding to the unconscious, is concerned with the satisfaction of primitive desires and with self-preservation.
It operates according to the pleasure principle and outside the realm of social rules or moral dictates. The ego,
associated with reason, controls the forces of the id to
bring it into line with the reality principle and make socialization possible, and channels the forces of the id
into acceptable activities. The critical, moral superego—
or conscience—developed in early childhood, monitors
and censors the ego, turning external values into internalized, self-imposed rules with which to inhibit the id.
Freud viewed individual behavior as the result of the interaction among these three components of the psyche.
At the core of Freud’s psychological structure is the
repression of unfulfilled instinctual demands. An unconscious process, repression is accomplished through a series of defense mechanisms. Those most commonly
named by Freud include denial (failure to perceive the

source of anxiety); rationalization (justification of an action by an acceptable motive); displacement (directing
repressed feelings toward an acceptable substitute); projection (attributing one’s own unacceptable impulse to
others); and sublimation (transforming an unacceptable
instinctual demand into a socially acceptable activity).
Freud continued modifying his theories in the 1920s
and changed a number of his fundamental views, including his theories of motivation and anxiety. In 1923, he
developed cancer of the jaw (he had been a heavy cigar
smoker throughout his life) and underwent numerous operations for this disease over the next 16 years. Life in
Vienna became increasingly precarious for Freud with
the rise of Nazism in the 1930s, and he emigrated to
London in 1938, only to die of his illness the following
year. Many of the concepts and theories Freud introduced—such as the role of the unconscious, the effect of
childhood experiences on adult behavior, and the operation of defense mechanisms—continue to be a source of
both controversy and inspiration. His books include
Totem and Taboo (1913), General Introduction to Psychoanalysis (1916), The Ego and the Id (1923), and Civilization and Its Discontents (1930).
See also Consciousness; Memory; Psychosexual
stages
Further Reading
Fromm, Erich. Sigmund Freud’s Mission. New York: Grove
Press, 1959.
Gay, Peter. Freud: A Life for Our Time. New York: Norton,
1988.

Friendship
Companions or peers with whom one has common
interests, emotional bonds, and social relationships.

Research has shown that people who have friends
tend to have better physical health and report a better
sense of psychological well-being than those with weak
or no network of friends. Although some people may
know a lot of people, they have a more select group of
friends and an even smaller number of “best” friends.
Friends provide support in three main ways: emotional, cognitive guidance, and tangible help. Friends
give each other emotional support by demonstrating care
and affection. They also provide guidance during times
of decision-making. Friends give help by meeting practical needs, such as loaning a car, cooking a meal, or taking care of a dog while a friend’s on vacation. Psychologists have hypothesized that friends are actually coping

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

261

Friendship

symbolic reactions to psychological shocks, usually of a
sexual nature, and that the memories associated with
these shocks, although they have been repressed into the
unconscious, indirectly affect the content not only of
dreams but of conscious activity.

Erich Fromm

mechanisms; by providing companionship and resources, friends alleviate stress in a person’s life.
There are cultural differences in the way friends are
viewed across the world. In cultures that value familial
network, such as the Asian culture, the function and role
of a friend are often found within the family structure, and
friendships are not given the same weight of importance
as in another culture. There are also varying definitions as
to what constitutes a friend. Someone might call another
person “friend” because they have mutual interests and activities, while another person considers a friend someone
he shares similar attitudes, values, and beliefs.

Erich Fromm
1900-1980
German-born American psychoanalyst, social
philosopher, and scholar whose writings have attracted the interest of a large general audience.

Erich Fromm was born in Frankfurt, Germany, and
studied sociology and psychology at the universities of
Frankfurt and Heidelberg, where he received his Ph.D.
in 1922. Fromm was trained in psychoanalysis at the
University of Munich and at the Psychoanalytic Institute
of Berlin. In 1925, he began his practice and was associated with the influential Institute for Social Research in
Frankfurt. Although Fromm began his professional career as a disciple of Sigmund Freud, he soon began to
differ with the Freudian emphasis on unconscious drives and neglect of the effects of social and economic
forces on personality. The theories he developed integrate psychology with cultural analysis and Marxist historical materialism. Fromm argued that each socioeconomic class fosters a particular character, governed by
ideas that justify and maintain it and that the ultimate
purpose of social character is to orient the individual toward those tasks that will assure the perpetuation of the
socioeconomic system.
Fromm consistently advocated the primacy of personal relationships and devotion to the common good
over subservience to a mechanistic superstate in his
work. He believed that humanity had a dual relationship
with nature, which they belong to but also transcend. According to Fromm, the unique character of human existence gives rise to five basic needs. First, human beings,
having lost their original oneness with nature, need relatedness in order to overcome their essential isolation.
They also need to transcend their own nature, as well as
the passivity and randomness of existence, which can be
accomplished either positively—by loving and creat262

Erich Fromm (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

ing—or negatively, through hatred and destruction. The
individual also requires a sense of rootedness, or belonging, in order to gain a feeling of security, and needs a
sense of identity as well. The remaining need is for orientation, or a means of facing one’s existential situation
by finding meaning and value in existence. Orientation
can be achieved either through assimilation (relating to
things) or socialization (relating to people).
Fromm identified several character orientations
found in Western society. The receptive character can
only take and not give; the hoarding character, threatened by the outside world, can not share; the exploitative
character satisfies desires through force and deviousness; and the marketing character—created by the impersonal nature of modern society—sees itself as a cog
in a machine, or as a commodity to be bought or sold.
Contrasting with these negative orientations is the productive character, capable of loving and realizing its full
potential, and devoted to the common good of humanity.
Fromm later described two additional character types:
the necrophilouscharacter, attracted to death, and the
biophilous character, drawn to life.
Fromm emigrated to the United States in 1934, following the rise of Nazism in Germany. In America,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Fromm’s work has had a deep and lasting influence
on Western thought. One central thesis that appears in
much of his writing is that alienation is the most serious and fundamental problem of Western civilization.
In his view, Western culture must be transformed—
through the application of psychoanalytic principles to
social issues—into societies that recognize the primacy
of human beings as responsible, sovereign individuals
and that are conducive to the attainment of individual
freedom, which he sees as the ultimate goal of humanity’s existence.
Further Reading
Funk, Rainer. Erich Fromm: The Courage to be Human. New
York: Human Sciences Press, 1989.

Fugue
An episode during which an individual leaves his
usual surroundings unexpectedly and forgets essential details about himself and his life.

Causes and symptoms
Fugues are classified as a dissociative disorder, a
syndrome in which an individual experiences a disruption in memory, consciousness, and/or identity. This

may last anywhere from less than a day to several
months, and is sometimes, but not always, brought on by
severe stress or trauma. Dissociative fugue (formerly
termed psychogenic fugue) is usually triggered by traumatic and stressful events, such as wartime battle, abuse,
rape, accidents, natural disasters, and extreme violence,
although fugue states may not occur immediately.
Individuals experiencing a fugue exhibit the following symptoms:
• Sudden and unplanned travel away from home together
with an inability to recall past events about one’s life.
• Confusion or loss of memory about one’s identity (amnesia). In some cases, an individual may assume a new
identity to compensate for the loss.
• Extreme distress and impaired functioning in day-today life as a result of the fugue episodes.
If the amnesia of fugue occurs without an episode of
unexpected travel (fleeing), dissociative amnesia is usually diagnosed.

Diagnosis
Patients who experience fugue states should undergo a thorough physical examination and patient history
to rule out an organic cause for the illness (e.g., epilepsy
or other seizure disorder). If no organic cause is found, a
psychologist or other mental healthcare professional will
conduct a patient interview and administer one or more
psychological assessments (also called clinical inventories, scales, or tests). These assessments may include the
Dissociative Experiences Scale (DES or DES-II), Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Dissociative Disorders (SCID-D), and the Dissociate Disorders Interview
Schedule (DDIS).
The use and abuse of certain medications and illegal
drugs can also prompt fugue-like episodes. For example,
alcohol-dependent patients frequently report alcohol-induced “blackouts” that mimic the memory loss of the
fugue state and sometimes involve unplanned travel.

Treatment
Dissociative fugue is relatively rare, with a prevalence rate of 0.2% in the general population. The length
of a fugue episode is thought to be related to the severity
of the stressor or trauma that caused it. The majority of
cases appear as single episodes with no recurrence. In
some cases, the individual will not remember events that
occurred during the fugue state. In other cases, amnesia
related to the traumatic event that triggered the fugue
may persist to some degree after the fugue episode has
concluded.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

263

Fugue

Fromm became increasingly controversial in orthodox
Freudian circles. He served on the faculties of, and lectured at, several universities in the United States, including Columbia University and Yale University, and in
Mexico. In 1941, Fromm wrote Escape from Freedom,
an analysis of totalitarianism that would become a classic in political philosophy and intellectual history as
well as in psychology. According to Fromm, the “escape” from freedom experienced upon reaching adulthood and gaining independence from one’s parents
leads to a profound sense of loneliness and isolation,
which the individual attempts to escape by establishing
some type of bond with society. In Fromm’s view, totalitarianism offered the individual a refuge from individual isolation through social conformity and submission
to authority. Among his other important books in the
areas of psychology, ethics, religion, and history are
Man for Himself (1947), Psychoanalysis and Religion
(1950), The Forgotten Language (1951), The Sane Society (1955), The Art of Loving (1956), Beyond the Chains
of Illusion (1962), The Heart of Man (1964), You Shall
Be As Gods (1966), The Revolution of Hope (1968), Social Character in a Mexican Village (1970), The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness (1973), and To Have or
To Be (1976).

Functional disorder

Treatment for dissociative fugue should focus on
helping the patient come to terms with the traumatic
event or stressor that caused the disorder. This can be
accomplished through various kinds of interactive therapies that explore the trauma and work on building the
patient’s coping mechanisms to prevent further recurrence. Some therapists use cognitive therapy, which focuses on changing maladaptive thought patterns. It is
based on the principal that maladaptive behavior (in this
case, the fugue episode itself) is triggered by inappropriate or irrational thinking patterns. A cognitive therapist will attempt to change these thought patterns (also
known as cognitive distortions) by examining the rationality and validity of the assumptions behind them with
the patient. In the case of a dissociative fugue brought
on by abuse, this may involve therapeutic work that uncovers and invalidates negative self-concepts the patient
has (e.g., “I am a bad person, therefore I brought on the
abuse myself”).
In some cases, hypnotherapy, or hypnosis, may be
useful in helping the patient recover lost memories of
trauma. Creative therapies (i.e., art therapy, music
therapy) are also constructive in allowing patients to express and explore thoughts and emotions in “safe” ways.
They also empower the patient by encouraging self-discovery and a sense of control.
Medication may be a useful adjunct, or complementary, treatment for some of the symptoms that the patient
may be experiencing in relation to the dissociative
episode. In some cases, antidepressant or anti-anxiety
medication may be prescribed.
Group therapy, either therapist/counselor-led or in
self-help format, can be helpful in providing an on-going
support network for the patient. It also provides the patient with opportunities to gain self-confidence and interact with peers in a positive way. Family therapy sessions may also be part of the treatment regime, both in
exploring the trauma that caused the fugue episode and
in educating the rest of the family about the dissociative
disorder and the causes behind it.
See also Dissociation/Dissociative disorders

American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders, 4th ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press, Inc., 1994.

Further Information
National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI). 200 North
Glebe Road, Suite 1015, Arlington, VA, USA. 222033754, (800)950-6264. http://www.nami.org.
264

A psychological disorder for which no organic
cause can be found.

Disorders traditionally classified as neuroses (including a variety of anxiety and mood disorders as well
as psychosomatic illnesses) are generally regarded as
functional disorders. While conditions classified as psychotic are usually believed to have biological origins,
neurotic conditions are generally believed to be caused
by developmental, psychosocial, or personality factors.
Psychotic disorders not associated with damage to
brain tissue from a head injury, infection, or similar
causes are also considered functional disorders.
Many mental health professionals are uncomfortable with the term “functional disorder” for a variety of
reasons. First, its meaning is often distorted. While the
term is essentially a designation of what a disorder is not
(i.e., organic), it tends to be interpreted as making positive statements about what the disorder is (i.e., induced
by environmental or psychosocial factors) when, in fact,
such causes may not have been scientifically proven. In
addition, “functional” as a classification continually becomes outdated as new discoveries are made about the
origins of certain disorders. Schizophrenia, for example, would be considered an organic disorder if a biochemical cause for the disease—which some researchers
believe exists—could be verified. By comparison, the
current system of classifying disorders in the Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, which is
organized by the mental faculty or area of behavior that
is impaired, is much less likely to become outdated due
to new research. A further objection to the term functional disorder is that it implies an artificial separation of the
mind and body, as a number of disorders have both organic and functional components.

Functional fixedness

Paula Ford-Martin
Further Reading

Functional disorder

A limitation in perception.

In solving problems, humans try to focus on the best
strategy to reach the goal. Sometimes problems are more
difficult to solve than they need to be because the available solutions are not clear or obvious. That is, humans
form mental sets, ways of viewing the potential solutions, that actually hinder progress.
When people develop functional fixedness, they recognize tools only for their obvious function. For examGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

A common theatrical situation involves a group of
people who want to enter a locked room when they have
no key. A solution often arises when somebody thinks to
insert a credit card between the door and the door jamb,
releasing the lock. In real life, if one needs to get into a
locked room, a useful implement might be present that
would help solve your problem. Unfortunately, the person may not recognize that it will help because he or she
is a victim of functional fixedness.
In many cases, people are quite adept at avoiding
functional fixedness, as when using a nail clipper as a
screwdriver or the heel of a shoe as a nutcracker.

Functionalism
A psychological approach, popular in the early
part of the twentieth century, that focused on how
consciousness functions to help human beings
adapt to their environment.

The goal of the first psychologists was to determine
the structure of consciousness just as chemists had
found the structure of chemicals. Thus, the school of
psychology associated with this approach earned the
name structuralism. This perspective began in Germany
in the laboratory of Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920).
Before long, however, psychologists suggested that
psychology should not concern itself with the structure of
consciousness because, they argued, consciousness was
always changing so it had no basic structure. Instead, they
suggested that psychology should focus on the function or
purpose of consciousness and how it leads to adaptive behavior. This approach to psychology was consistent with
Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution, which exerted a
significant impact on the character of psychology. The
school of functionalism developed and flourished in the
United States, which quickly surpassed Germany as the
primary location of scientific psychology.
In 1892, George Trumbull Ladd (1842-1921), one of
the early presidents of the American Psychological Association, had declared that objective psychology should
not replace the subjective psychology of the structuralists.
By 1900, however, most psychologists agreed with a later
president, Joseph Jastrow, that psychology was the science of mental content, not of structure. At that point,
structuralism still had some adherents, but it was fast becoming a minor part of psychology.

The early functionalists included the pre-eminent
psychologist and philosopher William James. James
promoted the idea that the mind and consciousness itself
would not exist if it did not serve some practical, adaptive purpose. It had evolved because it presented advantages. Along with this idea, James maintained that psychology should be practical and should be developed to
make a difference in people’s lives.
One of the difficulties that concerned the functionalists was how to reconcile the objective, scientific nature
of psychology with its focus on consciousness, which by
its nature is not directly observable. Although psychologists like William James accepted the reality of consciousness and the role of the will in people’s lives, even
he was unable to resolve the issue of scientific acceptance of consciousness and will within functionalism.
Other functionalists, like John Dewey, developed
ideas that moved ever farther from the realm that structuralism had created. Dewey, for example, used James’s
ideas as the basis for his writings, but asserted that consciousness and the will were not relevant concepts for
scientific psychology. Instead, the behavior is the critical
issue and should be considered in the context in which it
occurs. For example, a stimulus might be important in
one circumstance, but irrelevant in another. A person’s
response to that stimulus depends on the value of that
stimulus in the current situation. Thus, practical and
adaptive responses characterize behavior, not some unseen force like consciousness.
This dilemma of how to deal with a phenomenon as
subjective as consciousness within the context of an objective psychology ultimately led to the abandonment of
functionalism in favor of behaviorism, which rejected
everything dealing with consciousness. By 1912, very
few psychologists regarded psychology as the study of
mental content—the focus was on behavior instead. As it
turned out, the school of functionalism provided a temporary framework for the replacement of structuralism,
but was itself supplanted by the school of behaviorism.
Interestingly, functionalism drew criticism from
both the structuralists and from the behaviorists. The
structuralists accused the functionalists of failing to define the concepts that were important to functionalism.
Further, the structuralists declared that the functionalists
were simply not studying psychology at all; psychology
to a structuralist involved mental content and nothing
else. Finally, the functionalists drew criticism for applying psychology; the structuralists opposed applications
in the name of psychology.
On the other hand, behaviorists were uncomfortable
with the functionalists’ acceptance of consciousness and
sought to make psychology the study of behavior. Even-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

265

Functionalism

ple, an object is regarded as having only one fixed function. The problem-solver cannot alter his or her mental
set to see that the tool may have multiple uses.

Functionalism

tually, the behavioral approach gained ascendance and
reigned for the next half century.
Functionalism was important in the development of
psychology because it broadened the scope of psychological research and application. Because of the wider
perspective, psychologists accepted the validity of research with animals, with children, and with people having psychiatric disabilities. Further, functionalists introduced a wide variety of research techniques that were
beyond the boundaries of structural psychology, like
physiological measures, mental tests, and questionnaires.
The functionalist legacy endures in psychology today.
Some historians have suggested that functional psychology was consistent with the progressivism that characterized American psychology at the end of the nineteenth century: more people were moving to and living in

266

urban areas, science seemed to hold all the answers for
creating a Utopian society, educational reform was underway, and many societal changes faced America. It is not
surprising that psychologists began to consider the role
that psychology could play in developing a better society.
Further Reading
Biro, J.I., and Robert W. Shahan, eds. Mind, Brain, and Function: Essays in the Philosophy of Mind. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1982.
Leahey, T. H. A History of Modern Psychology. 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1994.
Putnam, Hilary. Representation and Reality. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1988.
Schultz, D. P., and S. E. Schultz. A History of Modern Psychology. 6th ed. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace College Publishers, 1996.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

G
Galen
130-200
Physician to Roman emperors and early author of
works on anatomy and physiology.

Galen, the last and most influential of the great ancient medical practitioners, was born in Pergamum, Asia
Minor. His father, the architect Nicon, is supposed to
have prepared Galen for a career in medicine following
the instructions given him in a dream by the god of medicine, Asclepius. Accordingly, Galen studied philosophy,
mathematics, and logic in his youth and then began his
medical training at age sixteen at the medical school of
Pergamum attached to the local shrine of Asclepius. At
age twenty, Galen embarked on extensive travels, broadening his medical knowledge with studies at Smyrna,
Corinth, and Alexandria. At Alexandria, the preeminent
research and teaching center of the time, Galen was able
to study skeletons (although not actual bodies).
Returning to Pergamum at age twenty-eight, Galen
became physician to the gladiators, which gave him
great opportunities for observations about human anatomy and physiology. In 161 A.D., Galen moved to Rome
and quickly established a successful practice after curing
several eminent people, including the philosopher Eudemus. Galen also conducted public lectures and demonstrations, began writing some of his major works on
anatomy and physiology, and frequently engaged in
polemics with fellow physicians. In 174 A.D., Galen was
summoned to treat Marcus Aurelius and became the emperor’s personal physician.
Galen once again returned to Pergamum in 166 A.D.,
perhaps to escape the quarreling, perhaps to avoid an
outbreak of plague in Rome. After a few years, Galen
was summoned back to Rome by Marcus Aurelius. He
became physician to two subsequent emperors, Commodus and Septimius Severvs, and seems to have stayed
in Rome for the rest of his career, probably dying there
in about 200 A.D.

Galen (Archive Photos, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

Galen was an astonishingly prolific writer, producing hundreds of works, of which about 120 have survived. His most important contributions were in anatomy. Galen expertly dissected and accurately observed all
kinds of animals, but sometimes mistakenly—because
human dissection was forbidden—applied what he saw
to the human body. Nevertheless, his descriptions of
bones and muscle were notable; he was the first to observe that muscles work in contracting pairs. He described the heart valves and the structural differences between arteries and veins. He used experiments to demonstrate paralysis resulting from spinal cord severing, control of the larynx through the laryngeal nerve, and

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

267

Sir Francis Galton

passage of urine from kidneys to bladder. An excellent
clinician, Galen pioneered diagnostic use of the pulse
rate and described cardiac arrhythmias. Galen also collected therapeutic plants in his extensive travels and explained their uses.
In his observations about the heart and blood vessels, however, Galen made critical errors that remained
virtually unchallenged for 1,400 years. He correctly recognized that blood passes from the right to the left side
of the heart, but decided this was accomplished through
minute pores in the septum, rather than through the pulmonary circulation. Like Erasistratus, Galen believed
that blood formed in the liver and was circulated from
there throughout the body in the veins. He did show that
arteries contain blood, but thought they also contained
and distributed pneuma, a vital spirit. In a related idea,
Galen believed that the brain generated and transmitted
another vital spirit through the (hollow) nerves to the
muscles, allowing movement and sensation.
After Galen, experimental physiology and anatomical research ceased for many centuries. Galen’s teachings became the ultimate medical authority, approved by
the newly ascendant Christian church because of Galen’s
belief in a divine purpose for all things, even the structure and functioning of the human body. The medical
world moved on from Galenism only with the appearance of Andreas Vesalius ‘s work on anatomy in 1543
and William Harvey’s work on blood circulation in 1628.

trip. He also became a fellow of both the Royal Geographical Society and the Royal Society. During the next
ten years, Galton was preoccupied with geographical and
meteorological studies. Among his other achievements,
Galton created the world’s first weather maps.

Sir Francis Galton
1822-1911
English scientist, explorer, and principal figure in
the early history of eugenics.

Born in Birmingham, England, Francis Galton was
descended from founders of the Quaker religion. He
learned to read before the age of three and became competent in Latin and mathematics by age five. Nevertheless, Galton’s formal education was unsuccessful. A rebellious student, he left school at the age of 16 to receive
medical training at hospitals in Birmingham and London. Entering Cambridge University two years later,
Galton failed to attain the high academic ranking he
sought, and this precipitated a mental breakdown, although he did eventually earn his degree.
After several years of living on an inheritance from
his father who died in 1845, Galton led a two-year expedition to the interior of southwest Africa, winning a gold
medal from the Royal Geographical Society for a highly
detailed map he produced from data obtained on this
268

Sir Francis Galton (The Library of Congress. Reproduced by
permission.)

The 1859 publication of On the Origin of Species by
Galton’s cousin, Charles Darwin, turned Galton’s attention to the subject of heredity. Theorizing that the operating principles of Darwin’s theory of evolution provided
the potential for the positive biological transformation of
humankind, Galton began to study the inheritance of intellectual characteristics among human beings. Based on
quantitative studies of prominent individuals and their
family trees, he concluded that intellectual ability is inherited in much the same way as physical traits, and he
later published his findings in Hereditary Genius (1869).
Galton’s belief in the hereditary nature of intelligence led him to the idea that society should encourage
superior individuals to procreate, while those with lesser
mental abilities should be discouraged from doing so, a
concept for which he coined the term “ eugenics,” denoting the scientific attempt to genetically improve the
human species through selective parenthood. It is interesting to note that Galton’s approach to eugenics was to
encourage the “best specimens” to procreate. This dif-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Galton carried out further research to distinguish between the effects of heredity and those of environment.
He polled members of the Royal Society about their lives,
using a new research tool of his own devising that was to
have a long life as an information-gathering device: the
questionnaire. Eventually, Galton modified his original
theories to recognize the effects of education and other
environmental factors on mental ability, although he continued to regard heredity as the preeminent influence.
Galton made significant contributions in many areas.
His strong interest in individual psychological differences
led him to pioneer intelligence testing, inventing the
word-association test. He also was the first known investigator to study twins who had been separated from each
other as a means of offering insight into the nature-nurture controversy. In his late sixties, Galton discovered
the analytical device known as the “regression line” for
studying the correlations between sets of data. In 1909,
he was knighted in recognition of his manifold accomplishments in such diverse fields as geography, meteorology, biology, statistics, psychology, and even criminology
(he had developed a system for classifying fingerprints).
While many of Galton’s specific conclusions and research methods turned out to have been flawed, his work
provided a foundation for the study of individual differences by both psychologists and educators. Among Galton’s many publications are Tropical South Africa (1853),
The Art of Travel (1855), Hereditary Genius (1869), English Men of Science: Their Nature and Nurture (1874),
Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its Development
(1883), and Memories of My Life (1908).
Further Reading
Forrest, D.W. Francis Galton: The Life and Work of a Victorian
Genius. London: Elek, 1974.
Pearson, Karl. The Life, Letters and Labours of Francis Galton. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press,
1914-30.

blers in the United States. While for many people gambling is a form of harmless recreation, for others it is an
uncontrollable and all-consuming pursuit, often eclipsing
everything else in their life. Some gamblers borrow or
steal money when their funds run out; some lose their
jobs and homes; and in almost all cases, their relationships with family and friends are aversely affected.
Pathological gambling is defined as a pattern of repeated gambling and preoccupation with gambling. The
term was not included in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders until 1980. Since then psychologists have
proposed several theories as to why people gamble. For
some, they state, it is a form of risk taking, which may
be an inherent personality trait. For many others, it is
the lure of a possible financial payoff. Psychologists are
still unsure, however, why some gamblers become
pathological gamblers. Some psychiatrists have proposed the “disease model,” stating that, like alcoholism,
gambling is a disease or a sickness of the mind. Behaviorists, on the other hand, see it as a learned, conditioned response. Because gamblers are reinforced intermittently—winning one hand and losing the next—they
are motivated to keep playing until they receive a positive reinforcement. Various research studies have shown
that any behavior that is tied to partial schedules of reinforcement are extremely difficult to stop.
Pathological gambling often begins in adolescence
in males, and somewhat later in females. Individuals
with this disorder often experience a progression in their
gambling, becoming increasingly preoccupied with gambling, increasing the amounts wagered, and often continuing to gamble despite attempts to stop or control the behavior.
Unfortunately, pathological gambling is often difficult to treat, but there are several treatment options. Perhaps the most widely practiced treatment is group therapy, such as is found in Gambler’s Anonymous. Pain
aversion therapy has also been used, in which a electric
shock is associated with gambling. In another therapy
called paradoxical intention, the therapist orders the
client to gamble according to a strict schedule, whether
the gambler wants to or not.

Gambling, pathological

See also Impulse control disorders

Preoccupation with gambling and uncontrollable
impulse to gamble, regardless of the problems
caused in daily life.

The Commission on the Review of the National Policy Toward Gambling reported that 61% of the U.S. population engaged in some form of gambling. The group also
estimated that there were 1.1 million compulsive gamGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Gangs
A group of people recognized as a distinct entity
and involved in antisocial, rebellious, or illegal activities.
269

Gangs

fered from the American approach referred to as “negative eugenics,” where the “worst specimens” were prevented from procreating.

Gangs

A gang is a group of people whose members recognize themselves as a distinct entity and are recognized as
such by their community. Their involvement in antisocial, rebellious, and illegal activities draws a negative response from the community and from law enforcement
officials. Other characteristics of gangs include a recognized leader; formal membership with initiation requirements and rules for its members; its own territory, or
turf; standard clothing or tattoos; private slang; and a
group name. In a document published by Boys and Girls
Clubs of America, the U.S. Department of Justice has divided gangs into several types. Territorial (“turf” or
“hood”) gangs are concerned with controlling a specific
geographical area. Organized, or corporate, gangs are
mainly involved in illegal activities such as drug dealing.
Scavenger gangs are more loosely organized than the
other two types and are identified primarily by common
group behavior.
Since the 1980s, gang activities have become an increasing cause for concern in many areas of the United
States. It is estimated that hundreds of thousands of people—perhaps upwards of a million—belong to thousands
of gangs in major urban centers, suburbs, small cities,
and even in rural areas. A study conducted at the University of Southern California found gang activity in 94% of
the country’s major cities and over 1,000 cities altogether. The number of gang members in Los Angeles County
alone was estimated at 130,000 in 1991. In the same year
there were an estimated 50 gangs in New York City, 125
in Chicago, and 225 in Dallas. Today’s gangs are more
involved in serious criminal activities than their predecessors. Gang-related violence has risen sharply, involving ever-younger perpetrators who are increasingly ready
to use deadly force to perpetuate rivalries or carry out
drug activities. In addition, the scope of gang activities
has increased, often involving links to drug suppliers or
customers in distant locations.
Gangs are found among virtually all ethnic groups.
Mexican American gangs, whose members are sometimes referred to as cholos, have long been active in the
Southwest and are now spreading to other parts of the
country. Today these groups include not only the traditional Mexican American membership but also new immigrants from Central American countries such as El
Salvador. The most visible Hispanic gangs on the East
Coast have traditionally been the Puerto Rican gangs in
New York City, originally formed by the children of immigrants who came to this country in the 1940s and
1950s. African American gang affiliations often center
around the Crips and Bloods, Los Angeles gangs that are
bitter rivals, or the Vice Lords and Folk Nation, which
are Chicago gangs. Chinese gangs, which began in New
York in the 1960s and 1970s, prey on the Asian commu270

nity, extorting money in return for protection. With the
wave of immigration from Southeast Asia following the
Vietnam war, Vietnamese and Cambodian gangs have
formed, also terrorizing their own communities.
The most visible white gangs are the skinheads
(named for their close-shaven heads), who typically embrace a racist, anti-Semitic, and anti-gay philosophy, often
involving neo-Nazi symbolism and beliefs. There are
thought to be between 3,000 and 4,000 skinheads in the
United States, including such groups as the Aryan Youth
Movement, Blitz Krieg, and White Power. Skinhead activities have included painting racial slurs on buildings, damaging synagogues and the homes of Jews and blacks, and
sometimes fatal assaults on members of minority groups.
The white Spur Posse, a gang of white high school athletes in California, received media attention in the late
1990s for sexually molesting teenage girls.
A variety of factors have been cited as causes for involvement in gangs. Social problems associated with gang
activity include poverty, racism, and the disintegration of
the nuclear family. Some critics claim that gangs are
glamorized in the media and by the entertainment industry. On a personal level, adolescents whose families are
not meeting their emotional needs turn to gangs as substitute families where they can find acceptance, intimacy,
and approval. Gangs can also provide the sense of identity
that young people crave as they confront the dislocations
of adolescence. Teenagers also join gangs because of social pressure from friends. Others feel physically unsafe in
their neighborhoods if they do not join a gang. For some
people, the connection to a gang is through family members who belong—sometimes even several generations of
a single family. Yet another incentive for joining is money
from the gangs’ lucrative drug trade. Drug profits can be
so exorbitant as to dwarf the income from any legitimate
job: teenagers in one suburban high school in the early
1990s were handling $28,000 a week in drug money, with
individual profit averaging $5,000.
The basic unit in gangs, whatever their origin or
larger structure, is a clique of members who are about
the same age (these groups are also called posses or
sets). A gang may consist entirely of such a clique, or it
may be allied with similar groups as part of a larger
gang. The Crips and Bloods consist of many sets, with
names such as the Playboy Gangster Crips, the Bounty
Hunters, and the Piru Bloods. It is to their clique or set
that members feel the greatest loyalty. These neighborhood groups have leaders, who may command as many
as 200 followers. In groups affiliated with larger gangs,
these local leaders are accountable to chiefs higher up in
the gang hierarchy. At the top is the kingpin, who has the
ultimate say in how the gang conducts its financial operations and oversees its members.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Gangs adopt certain dress codes by which members
show their unity and make their gang affiliation visible
both to members of other gangs and to the community at
large. Gang members are usually identifiable by both the
style and color of their clothing. Latino gangs traditionally wore khaki pants, white T-shirts, and plain cotton
jackets, but today black pants and jackets are favored,
often worn with black L.A. Raiders caps. The Crips are
strongly associated with the color blue, typically wearing
blue jackets, running shoes with blue stripes and laces,
and blue bandannas, either tied around their heads or
hanging prominently from a back pocket. (The color of
the rival Bloods is red.) Two rival African American
gangs in Chicago wear hats tilted in different directions
to signal their affiliation. With the increased use of deadly force by today’s gang members, gang clothing codes
can be very dangerous: nonmembers have been killed for
accidentally wandering onto gang turf wearing the colors
of a rival group. In addition to their clothing, gang members express solidarity by adopting street names and
using secret symbols and codes, often in graffiti spraypainted in public places.
Although most gang members are male, women do
join gangs—either mixed-gender or all-female gangs
(which are sometimes satellites of male gangs and sometimes independent of them). Traditionally they have
played a subservient role in mixed gangs, assisting the
males in their activities and forming romantic attach-

Gangs

The lowest level on which a young person may be
associated with a gang is as a lookout—the person who
watches for the police during drug deals or other criminal activities. Lookouts, who are commonly between
seven and twelve years old, can be paid as much as three
hundred dollars a week. At the next level are
“wannabes,” older children or preteens who identify
themselves with a gang although they are still too young
for membership. They may wear clothing resembling
that of the gang they aspire to and try to ingratiate themselves with its members. Sometimes they cause trouble
in or out of school as a way of drawing the gang’s attention. Once wannabes are being considered for entrance
into a gang they undergo some form of initiation. Often
it includes the commission of a specified crime as a way
of “proving themselves.” In addition, gangs generally
practice certain initiation rituals, such as “walking the
line,” in which initiates have to pass between two lines of
members who beat them. In other cases, initiation brutalities follow a less orderly course, with a succession of
gang members randomly perpetrating surprise beatings
that initiates have to withstand without attempting to defend themselves. Other rituals, such as cutting initiates
and mixing their blood with that of older members, are
also practiced.

Members of the Crips gang in Los Angeles. (Photo by Daniel
Laini. Corbis/Daniel Laini. Reproduced with permission.)

ments within the gang, but generally not engaging in
criminal activities more serious than shoplifting or fighting girls from other gangs. To be initiated into a mixedsex gang, female members have often been required to
have sex with multiple gang members. Today girl gang
members are more apt than in the past to participate in
serious violence, such as drive-by shootings, armed robbery, and “wildings,” savage group attacks on innocent
victims in public places, often involving sexual assault.
Perhaps the most troubling feature of gang activity in
the 1980s and 1990s is its increased level of violence,
which often victimizes not only gang members themselves but also innocent bystanders who unwittingly find
themselves in its path. Thousands of people with no gang
connections have been killed because they were in the
wrong place at the wrong time. Most gang-related
killings are linked to fights over turf (including drug turf),
“respect” (perceived threats to a gang member’s status),
or revenge. In Los Angeles County, the number of gangrelated slayings soared from 212 in 1984 to 803 in 1992.
Nationwide, the total number of teenagers murdered
every year has risen 55% since 1988, an increase thought
to be closely linked to the growth of gang activity. In
1991 over 2,000 people were injured or killed in drive-by
shootings, 90% of which are thought to be committed by
gang members. A major factor that has raised the level of
gang violence is easy access to such weapons as automatic rifles, rapid-fire pistols, and submachine guns.
A common feature of membership in gangs is the
difficulty encountered by people who want to quit. They
are virtually always punished in some way, ranging from
ritualized beatings (mirroring the initiation ceremony) to
murder. Sometimes the member’s entire family is terrorized. Many persons—and sometimes even their families—have had to relocate to another city in order to
safely end gang affiliations. In some cities, there are or-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

271

Howard Earl Gardner

ganizations (some staffed by ex-gang members) that help
people who want to leave gangs.
Further Reading
Greenberg, Keith Elliot. Out of the Gang. Minneapolis, MN:
Lerner Publications, 1992.
Gardner, Sandra. Street Gangs in America. New York: Franklin
Watts, 1992.
Knox, Mike. Gangsta in the House: Understanding Gang Culture. Troy, MI: Momentum Books, 1995.
Monti, Daniel. Wannabe: Gangs in Suburbs and Schools.
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1994.
Oliver, Marilyn Tower. Gangs: Trouble in the Streets. Springfield, NJ: Enslow Publishers, 1995.
Webb, Margot. Coping with Street Gangs. New York: Rosen
Publishing Group, 1992.

Further Information
National Youth Gang Information Center. 4301 Fairfax Dr.,
Suite 730, Arlington, VA 22203, (800) 446–4264.

Howard Earl Gardner
1943American psychologist, educator, and creator of
theory of multiple intelligence.

Howard Earl Gardner was born and raised in Scranton, Pennsylvania. His parents, Ralph and Hilde (maiden
name Weilheimer), were refugees from Nazi Germany.
Gardner was a good student who greatly enjoyed playing
the piano. In fact, he became an accomplished pianist as a
child and considered becoming a professional pianist.
While Gardner did not pursue becoming a professional pianist, he did teach piano from 1958 to 1969. The arts and
teaching are interests he has pursued throughout his career.
Gardner received his B.A. summa cum laude in social relations from Harvard College in 1965 and his
Ph.D. in psychology from Harvard University in 1971.
At Harvard he studied with the renowned developmental
psychologists Jerome Bruner and Erik Erikson, and
the philosopher Nelson Goodman. He had thought he
would research children and their artistic abilities but became fascinated with neuropsychology after attending a
lecture on the subject given by Norman Geschwind, a
well-known neuropsychologist. Indeed, Gardner went on
to do a postdoctoral fellowship under Geschwind at the
Boston Veterans Hospital where he worked for 20 years.
His research has focused for the most part on the nature of human intelligence, the nature of and development
of abilities in the arts and how they relate to and reflect intelligence, and on educational processes. For numerous
years, Gardner conducted research in symbol-using capac272

ities in normal and gifted children, and in adults who had
experienced brain damage. Through his efforts to bring
these two areas of work together, he developed his theory
of multiple types of intelligence, which he introduced in
Frames of Mind (1983). Drawing on research in neuropsychology, he proposes that there are seven distinct types of
intelligence, each based in a different area of the brain.
Thus intelligence is not one general factor that underlies
different abilities—the predominant belief upon which
most intelligence tests had been based.
In the mid-1980s Gardner started to become involved in efforts to reform schools in the United States.
He started to teach at the Harvard Graduate School of
Education in 1986. He is now Co-Director of Harvard
Project Zero, which he joined in the mid-1980s. Project
Zero is a research group that studies human cognition,
focusing on the arts in particular. Among other things, he
and his colleagues have worked on designing performance-based tests and using the theory of multiple types
of intelligence to create more individualized teaching
and testing methods. Most recently, Gardner has become
involved in carrying out long-term case studies of successful leaders and creators. One aspect of this work investigates the relationship between a person’s production
of exemplary work and his or her personal values.
Gardner is currently the John H. and Elisabeth A.
Hobbs Professor in Cognition and Education at the Harvard Graduate School of Education. In addition he is Adjunct Professor of Psychology at Harvard University, and
Adjunct Professor of Neurology at the Boston University
School of Medicine.
Gardner has written more than 400 research articles
and twenty books. In The Mind’s New Science (1985)
Gardner discussed how cognitive science has the potential
to understand creativity. Two later books, The Unschooled
Mind (1991) and Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in
Practice (1993) spell out how his perspectives can be put
into practice in education. Gardner’s work has been highly
influential. His books have been translated into 20 languages. In addition, he has been given honors by numerous
psychological and educational organizations.
Gardner is married to Ellen Winner. He was divorced from the well-respected developmental psychologist, educator, and author Judith (Krieger) Gardner, who
passed away in 1994. Gardner has four children.
See also Culture-fair test; Emotional intelligence
Marie Doorey
Further Reading
Cohen, D. “Howard Gardner.” In Psychologists on Psychology,
2nd Ed. London and New York: Routledge, 1995. Pp. 97105.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Information
Harvard University Graduate School of Education. Larsen
Hall, Cambridge, MA, USA. 02138.

Gender bias
Differences in the treatment of males and females.

Gender bias, and its corollary, gender equity, describe the comparison of opportunities and treatment
available to males with those available to females.
Today, gender bias is observed and discussed in societies
and cultures worldwide. Parents and teachers of young
people are especially concerned with unequal treatment
of boys and girls, particularly the effect these differences
have on child development. Economic development
professionals have observed that, from subsistence to advanced economies, women are assigned different workloads, have different responsibilities for child and family
welfare, and receive different rewards for performance.
In the United States, the Education Amendments of
1972 were passed by the U.S. Congress. These included Title IX, introduced by Representative Edith Green
of Oregon, requiring educational institutions that receive federal funds to provide equal opportunities in all
activities for girls and boys. Title IX applies to all
schools, public and private, that receive money from
the federal government, from kindergarten through
higher education.
However, in 1992 a study published by the American Association of University Women (AAUW) revealed
that enforcement of this law has been lax nationwide.
The AAUW’s report, “How Schools Shortchange Girls,”
which compiled results from hundreds of research studies and articles on gender bias at every educational level,
concluded that schools continue to perpetuate subtle discrimination against girls, stereotyping them as studious
and well-behaved, while more aggressive students, usually the boys, may receive more attention from the
teacher. Additionally, a 1989 study of books used in high
school literature classes found that 90 percent of the
most frequently assigned books were written by males; a
year later, an evaluation of school textbooks specifically
written to comply with gender-equity guidelines in Cali-

fornia revealed lingering bias toward males in both language usage and in accounts of historical milestones.
Female students are affected by gender bias in many
subtle but significant ways. Girls have lower expectations for their success in math and science; are more
likely to attribute academic success to luck rather than to
ability, and are more likely to equate academic failure to
lack of ability (boys are more likely to attribute failure to
lack of effort). Boys are more likely that girls to challenge the teacher when they do not agree with an answer.
Generally, girls earn higher grades than boys, but boys
outperform girls on standardized tests. Boys with higher
SAT scores are more likely than girls with equal or better
grades to be awarded academic scholarships.
The ramifications of gender bias are not limited to
the educational arena. Researchers have shown that in
most cultures the lack of decision-making power among
females regarding sexual and economic matters contributes to population growth and confines women to
subservient roles to men—usually their fathers, and later,
their husbands. Although women make up 45 percent of
the workforce in the United States, 60 percent of professional women are in traditionally female occupations
such as nursing and teaching.
Gender stereotypes defining appropriate activities
and behavior for men and women are prevalent in every
culture, even though they may differ slightly from culture to culture. Awareness of the existence of these biases will help to overcome their negative effects.
Further Reading
Childs, Ruth Axman. Gender Bias and Fairness. Washington,
DC: ERIC Clearinghouse on Texts, Measurement, and
Evaluation, 1990.
Gay, Kathleen. Rights and Respect: What You Need to Know
About Gender Bias. Brookfield, CT: Millbrook Press,
1995.
Walker, Michael. “Gender Bias: Is Your Daughter’s School
Prepping Her for Failure?” Better Homes and Gardens
(April 1993): 40+.

Gender constancy
A child’s realization that gender is fixed and does
not change over time.

The concept of gender constancy, influenced by the
cognitive development theory of Jean Piaget, was introduced by Lawrence Kohlberg (1927-1987). Addressing the formation of gender identity in terms of cognitive development, Kohlberg advanced the idea that the
development of sex roles depends in large part on a

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

273

Gender sonstancy

Nucci, L.P. “Gardner, Howard Earl.” In Biographical dictionary of psychology. London and New York: Routledge,
1997.
Obituary in The Boston Globe, Judith Gardner. November 29,
1994.
Harvard Website Short biography of Howard Gardner
http://www.pz.harvard.edu/Pls/HG.htm

Gender identity

child’s understanding that gender remains constant
throughout a person’s lifetime. Children realize that they
are male or female and are aware of the gender of others
by the age of three. However, at these ages they still do
not understand that people cannot change genders the
way they can change their clothes, names, or behavior.
Kohlberg theorized that children do not learn to behave
in gender-appropriate ways until they understand that
gender is permanent, which occurs at about the age of
seven. At this point they start modeling the behavior of
members of their own sex. Although it has been supported by some research studies, Kohlberg’s theory has also
been criticized on the grounds that children do show certain types of gender-associated behavior, such as toy and
playmate selection, by the ages of two or three. This
points to the fact that there are others factors, such as
parental reinforcement, that influence the adoption of
sex-typed behavior.

Gender identity
The sense of identification with either the male or
female sex, as manifested in appearance, behavior,
and other aspects of a person’s life.

Influenced by a combination of biological and sociological factors, gender identity emerges by the age of
two or three and is reinforced at puberty. Once established, it is generally fixed for life.
Aside from sex differences, other biological contrasts between males and females are already evident in
childhood. Girls mature faster than boys, are physically
healthier, and are more advanced in developing oral and
written linguistic skills. Boys are generally more advanced at envisioning and manipulating objects in space.
They are more aggressive and more physically active,
preferring noisy, boisterous forms of play that require
larger groups and more space than the play of girls the
same age. In spite of conscious attempts to reduce sex
role stereotyping in recent decades, boys and girls are
still treated differently by adults from the time they are
born. The way adults play with infants has been found to
differ based on gender—girls are treated more gently
and approached more verbally than boys. As children
grow older, many parents, teachers, and other authority
figures still tend to encourage independence, competition, and exploration more in boys and expressivity, nurturance, and obedience in girls.
A major step in the formation of gender identity occurs at about the age of three when children first become
aware of anatomical differences between the sexes, usu274

ally through observation of siblings or peers. The awareness of physical difference is followed by awareness of
the cultural differences between males and females and
identification with the parent of the same sex, whose behavior the child begins to imitate. The most famous
20th-century theory about the acquisition of gender identity at this stage of life is the Oedipus complex formulated by Sigmund Freud (1856-1939). Like its female
counterpart, which Freud termed the Electra complex,
the Oedipus complex revolves around a child’s wish to
possess the parent of the opposite sex, while simultaneously wishing to eliminate the parent of the same sex,
who is perceived as a rival.
In the Oedipus complex, the young boy develops incestuous desires toward his mother, while regarding his
father as a rival for her affections. Fearing that the father
will cut off his penis in retaliation—a phenomenon
Freud called castration anxiety—the boy represses his
forbidden desires and finally comes to identify with the
father, internalizing his values and characteristics, which
form the basis for the child’s superego. In the female
version of this theory, the young girl’s discovery of sexual difference results in penis envy, which parallels castration anxiety in boys. The girl blames her mother for depriving her of a penis, and desires her father because he
possesses one. As in the Oedipus complex, the girl eventually represses her incestuous desires and identifies with
the same-sex parent (in this case, the mother).
The Oedipus complex has been widely criticized, especially by feminist critics who reject its assumption that
“anatomy is destiny.” One respected feminist theory is
that of Nancy Chodorow, for whom the central factor in
gender identity acquisition is the mother’s role as primary
caregiver, which leads to a greater sense of interrelatedness in girls, who identify with the mother and go on to
reproduce the same patterns of mothering in their own
adult lives, while boys, needing to identify with the parent of the opposite sex, acquire a defining sense of separateness and independence early in life. This “reproduction of mothering,” being both biologically and sociologically determined, is at least theoretically open to the possibility of change if patterns of parenting can be altered.
The formation of gender identity has been approached in different terms by Lawrence Kohlberg
(1927-1987), who formulated the concept of gender
constancy, the awareness that gender remains fixed
throughout a person’s lifetime. Kohlberg noted that
while children are aware of their own gender and the
gender of others by the age of three, they do not really
begin assuming appropriate gender-based behavior until
the age of about seven, when they first understand that
gender is permanent—that they cannot change gender
the way they can change their clothes or their behavior.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

While most people follow a predictable pattern in
the acquisition of gender identity, some develop a gender
identity inconsistent with their biological sex, a condition variously known as gender confusion, gender identity disorder, or transgender, which affects about 1 in
20,000 males and 1 in 50,000 females. Researchers have
found that both early socialization and hormonal factors
may play a role in the development of gender identity
disorder. People with gender identity disorder usually
feel from their earliest years that they are trapped in the
wrong body and begin to show signs of gender confusion
between the ages of two and four. They prefer playmates
of the opposite sex at an age when most children prefer
to spend time in the company of same-sex peers. They
also show a preference for the clothing and typical activities of the opposite sex; transsexual males may show interest in dresses and makeup. Females with gender identity disorder are bored by ordinary female pastimes and
prefer the rougher types of activity typically associated
with males, such as contact sports.
Both male and female transsexuals believe and repeatedly insist that they actually are members of the opposite sex. They desire to live as members of the opposite sex, sometimes manifesting this desire by crossdressing, either privately or in public. In some cases,
adult transsexuals (both male and female) have their primary and secondary sexual characteristics altered
through a sex change operation, consisting of surgery
followed by hormone treatments.
Further Reading
Chodorow, Nancy. The Reproduction of Mothering: Psychoanalysis and the Sociology of Gender. Berkeley: University of Berkeley Press, 1978.
Diamant, Louis, and Richard D. McAnulty, eds. The Psychology of Sexual Orientation, Behavior, and Identity: A Handbook. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1995.
Golombok, Susan, and Robyn Fivush. Gender Development.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Gender identity disorder
A condition, sometimes called transsexualism, in
which an individual develops a gender identity inconsistent with their anatomical and genetic sex.

Researchers have suggested that both early socialization and prenatal hormones may play an important
role in the development of transsexuality. It is estimated

that about 1 in 20,000 males and 1 in 50,000 females are
transsexuals. Gender identity disorder generally begin to
manifest between the ages of two and four, in which a
child displays a preference for the clothing and typical
activities of the opposite sex and also prefer playmates of
the opposite sex. Young boys like to play house (assuming a female role), draw pictures of girls, and play with
dolls. Girls with gender identity disorder prefer short
hairstyles and boys’ clothing, have negative feelings
about maturing physically as they approach adolescence,
and show little interest in typically female pastimes, preferring the traditionally rougher male modes of play, including contact sports. Cross-gender behavior carries a
greater social stigma for boys than girls; girls with gender
identity disorder experience less overall social rejection,
at least until adolescence. Approximately five times more
boys than girls are referred to therapists for the disorder.
Most children outgrow gender identity disorder with
time and the influence of their parents and peers. Adolescents with gender identity disorder are prone to low selfesteem, social isolation, and distress, and are especially
vulnerable to depression and suicide. Preoccupied with
cross-gender wishes, they fail to develop both romantic
relationships with the opposite sex and peer relationships
with members of their own sex, and their relationships
with their parents may suffer as well. Approximately 75
percent of boys with gender identity disorder display a
homosexual or bisexual orientation by late adolescence
or early adulthood, although without a continuation of
the disorder. Most of the remaining 25 percent become
heterosexual, also without a continuation of the disorder,
and those individuals in whom gender identity disorder
persists into adulthood may develop either a homosexual
or heterosexual orientation.
The major symptom of gender identity disorder in
adults is the desire to live as a member of the opposite
sex by adopting its social role, behavior, and physical appearance. Some transsexuals become obsessed with activities that reduce gender-related stress, including
cross-dressing (dressing as a member of the opposite
sex), which may be practiced either privately or in public. (Transvestism is a condition in which individuals
cross-dress primarily for sexual arousal.) Both male and
female transsexuals may elect to alter their primary and
secondary sexual characteristics by undergoing surgery
to make their genitals as much like those of the opposite
sex as possible. Sex-change surgery was pioneered in
Europe in the early 1930s and had gained international
notoriety after the procedure was performed on a former
American soldier named George (Christine) Jorgenson
in Denmark in 1952.
Public awareness of transsexualism has increased
through the publicity surrounding such prominent fig-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

275

Gender identity disorder

Kohlberg believed that children do not start systematically imitating the behavior of members of their own sex
until that point.

General adaptation syndrome

ures as British travel writer Jan Morris (who wrote
about her experiences in her book Conundrum) and
American tennis star Renee Richards. As of the mid1970s, it was estimated that more than 2,500 Americans had undergone sex-change operations, and in Europe 1 in 30,000 males and 1 in 100,000 females sought
sex-change surgery. The operation itself is accompanied by hormone treatments that aid in acquiring the
secondary sex characteristics of the desired sex. While
a number of individuals have gone on to lead happy,
productive lives following sex-change operations, others fail to make the transition and continue to suffer
from gender identity disorder.

General Adaptation Syndrome

Initiating stress

Alarm reaction and shock;
psychological effort at self-control
and defense mechanisms

See also Gender identity; Sex roles; Transgender
Further Reading
Morrison, James. DSM-IV Made Easy: The Clinician’s Guide
to Diagnosis. New York: The Guilford Press, 1995

Systemic resistance;
psychological response may
deviate into psychosis

General adaptation syndrome
A profound physiological reaction of an organism
to severe stress, consisting of three stages.

The first stage of the general adaptation syndrome
is alarm reaction, and includes the shock phase and the
countershock phase. In the shock phase, there are significant changes in several organic systems. For example, body temperature and blood pressure are lowered,
and muscle tone is decreased. In the countershock
phase, there is a defensive response to these changes,
including an increased production of adrenocortical
hormones. The second is resistance, during which the
affected systems recover toward their normal levels of
functioning. The third stage is exhaustion, and is
reached if the defenses of the organism are unable to
withstand the stress. In the exhaustion stage, the shock
phase of the alarm reaction is essentially repeated, resulting in death.
Further Reading
Selye, Hans. The Stress of Life. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1978.

Genital stage
See Psychosexual stages
276

Exhaustion;
psychological response
could be stupor or violence

Genius
A state of intellectual or creative giftedness.

There are differences in intellectual attainment
among people. Some people make strides in learning and
creativity that are well beyond what would normally be
expected and are called geniuses. Although definitions of
genius, or giftedness, are inevitably culture-bound and
subjective, psychologists are trying to determine what
factors might contribute to its emergence.
In a 1981 study, William Fowler surveyed decades
of scientific inquiry into the making of genius. He
found that in one important study, 87% of the gifted
children studied had been given substantial, intensive
training by their parents at home, focusing on speech,
reading, and mathematics—all highly structured avenues. The parents of these gifted children had ambitious and sometimes very specific plans for their children. The parents were nearly all from the professional class, allowing them the time and the money to de-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Arnold Gesell

vote such resources to the intellectual development of
their children.
Psychologists have examined various home-tutoring
techniques and have found that there appears to be no
single kind of stimulation that might turn a normal child
into a gifted child. All methods seem to work, provided
they center on language or math. It has even been suggested that the method matters little because the child is
responding to the quantity of attention rather than to the
content of what is being taught.
When a person reaches school age, it becomes possible to measure his or her intelligence more reliably. Intelligence tests are the subject of intense debate among psychologists, educators, and the general public. Most standardized tests measure logical-mathematical, linguistic,
and spatial intelligence. However, the idea of multiple intelligences was formulated by psychologist Howard
Gardner, who defined six components of intelligence:
linguistic, logical-mathematical, spatial, musical, bodilykinesthetic, and personal. Today, many people regard intelligence as comprising different types of skills and talents. Most school systems, however, continue to measure
intelligence, and giftedness, according to test results measuring logical-mathematical, linguistic, and spatial intelligence. Gifted people are often identified by their unusually high scores on traditional intelligence tests.

Arnold Gesell (UPI/Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with
permission.)

Further Reading
Allman, Arthur. “The Anatomy of a Genius.” U.S. News and
World Report, (October 25, 1993).
Begley, Sharon. “The Puzzle of Genius.” Newsweek, (June 28,
1993).
Gottfried, Allen W., et al. Gifted IQ: Early Developmental Aspects. New York: Plenum Press, 1994.
Howe, Michael J.A. The Origins of Exceptional Abilities.
Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell, 1990.

Arnold Gesell
1880-1961
American psychologist and pediatrician whose
principal area of study was the mental and physical
development of normal individuals from birth
through adolescence.

Arnold Gesell was born in Alma, Wisconsin, and received his bachelor’s degree from the University of Wisconsin. In 1906, he earned his Ph.D. from Clark University, where he was motivated to specialize in child development by studying with the prominent American psychologist G. Stanley Hall (1844-1924). Gesell received his
M.D. from Yale University in 1915. After briefly holding a

position at the Los Angeles State Normal School, he was
appointed an assistant professor of at Yale University,
where he established the Clinic of Child Development and
served as its director from 1911 to 1948. He was later a
consultant with the Gesell Institute of Child Development.
Gesell’s early work involved the study of mental retardation in children, but he soon became convinced that an understanding of normal development is necessary for the
understanding of abnormal development.
Gesell was among the first to implement a quantitative study of human development from birth through
adolescence, focusing his research on the extensive
study of a small number of children. He began with preschool children and later extended his work to ages 5 to
10 and 10 to 16. From his findings, Gesell concluded
that mental and physical development in infants, children, and adolescents are comparable and parallel orderly processes. In his clinic, he trained researchers to collect data and produced reports that had a widespread influence on both parents and educators. The results of his
research were utilized in creating the Gesell Development Schedules, which can be used with children between four weeks and six years of age. The test measures
responses to standardized materials and situations both
qualitatively and quantitatively. Areas emphasized in-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

277

Gestalt principles of organization

clude motor and language development, adaptive behavior, and personal-social behavior. The results of the
test are expressed first as developmental age (DA),
which is then converted into developmental quotient
(DQ), representing “the portion of normal development
that is present at any age.” A separate developmental
quotient may be obtained for each of the functions on
which the scale is built.

The psychologists in Germany who proposed the
Gestalt principles of organization developed theories
and research focusing on the effects of holistic patterns
or configurations (the rough meaning of the German
term Gestalt ) on perception. Much of their work emphasized the concept that the whole affects the way in
which parts are perceived: “the whole is more than the
sum of its parts.”

In the 1940s and 1950s, Gesell was widely regarded
as the nation’s foremost authority on child rearing and
development, and developmental quotients based on his
development schedules were widely used as an assessment of children’s intelligence. He wrote several bestselling books, including Infant and Child in the Culture
of Today (1943) and The Child from Five to Ten (1946),
both co-authored with Frances L. Ilg. Gesell argued, in
widely read publications, that the best way to raise children requires reasonable guidance, rather than permissiveness or rigidity. His influence was also felt through
the many child psychologists and pediatricians he helped
educate. Eventually, the preeminence of Gesell’s ideas
gave way to theories that stressed the importance of environmental rather than internal elements in child development, as the ideas of Jerome S. Bruner and Jean Piaget gained prominence. Gesell was criticized for basing
his work too rigidly on observation of a small number of
research subjects who were all children of white, middle-class parents in a single New England city. He was
also faulted for allowing too little leeway for individual
and cultural differences in growth patterns.

The Gestalt principles of organization involve observations about the ways in which we group together various stimuli to arrive at perceptions of patterns and
shapes. For example, at the most basic level the principle
of proximity leads us to group together objects that are
close to each other spatially. We also have a powerful
tendency to group together mentally items that are similar to each other in terms of their appearance, texture, or
other properties. Other qualities that govern our perceptions are continuity and closure: if part of an object (or
person) is blocked from view, we assume that it is a continuous whole and automatically “fill in” the missing
part or parts.

Although the developmental quotient is no longer accepted as a valid measure of intellectual ability, Gesell remains an important pioneer in child development, and is
recognized for his advances in the methodology of observing and measuring behavior. He also inaugurated the
use of photography and observation through one-way mirrors as research tools. Gesell was also a prolific author,
whose other books include An Atlas of Infant Behavior
(1934) and Youth: The Years from Ten to Sixteen (1956).

The attribute of simplicity also affects perception.
People will interpret something they see in a manner that
provides the simplest possible explanation. For example,
if all other things are equal and one has a choice of perceiving a drawing as either two- or three-dimensional, it
will be perceived as two-dimensional. However, if its
features make it more complex to interpret in two dimensions than in three, one will automatically perceive it as
three-dimensional. A final influence on perception,
called “common fate,” has to do with movement. Visual
stimuli (such as a flock of birds or a marching band) that
are moving in the same direction and at the same speed
are perceived as belonging together.
Further Reading
Köhler, Wolfgang. The Task of Gestalt Psychology. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1972.

See also Infancy

Gestalt psychology

Further Reading
Ames, Louise Bates. Arnold Gesell: Themes of His Work. New
York: Human Sciences Press, 1989.

Gestalt principles of
organization
Principles of perceptual organization proposed by
the early 20th-century German psychologists of the
Gestalt school.
278

The school of psychology that emphasizes the
study of experience and behavior as wholes rather
than independently functioning, disparate parts.

The Gestaltists were at odds with the popular school
of psychology of the day, known as structuralism, whose
proponents believed that the mind consists of units or elements and could be understood by mapping and studying them in combination. The Gestalt psychologists believed that mental experience was dependent not on a
simple combination of elements but on the organization

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The Gestalt school of psychology was founded in
the early twentieth century by the German psychologist
Max Wertheimer and his younger colleagues, Kurt
Koffka and Wolfgang Köhler. The association between
the three men began in 1910 with early studies of perception that ultimately led to the wide-ranging Gestalt
view of the whole as more than the sum of its parts. Investigating the phenomenon of “apparent perception”—
on which motion pictures are based—they discovered
that when two lights were flashed in succession under
specific conditions, an illusion of continuous motion was
produced. The subject perceived a single light which appeared to move from the position of the first light to the
position of the second light. This and other experiments
led the Gestaltists to conclude that the mind imposes its
own patterns of organization on the stimuli it receives
rather than merely recording them, and that the significance of the mental “wholes” thus formed transcends
that of their component parts. In a series of lectures in
1913, Wertheimer outlined a new psychological approach based on the belief that mental operations consist
mainly of these organic “wholes” rather than the chains
of associated sensations and impressions emphasized by
Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920) and other psychological
researchers of the day.
In the same year Köhler began six years of experimental animal research on the Canary Islands during which he
made many discoveries that applied Gestalt theories to animal learning and perception. One of his most famous experiments was with chickens which he trained to peck
grains from either the lighter or darker of two sheets of
paper. When the chickens trained to prefer the light color
were presented with a choice between that color and a new
sheet that was still lighter, a majority switched to the new
sheet. Similarly, chickens trained to prefer the darker color,
when presented with a parallel choice, chose a new, darker
color. These results, Köhler maintained, proved that what
the chickens had learned was an association with a relationship, rather than with a specific color. This finding,
which contradicted contemporary behaviorist theories, became known as the Gestalt law of transposition, because
the test subjects had transposed their original experience to
a new set of circumstances.
Although its founders conceived of Gestalt theory as
a way to understand motivation, learning, and other
cognitive processes, much early Gestalt research was
concentrated in the area of perception. In the dozen years
following the first studies in apparent motion, additional

rules of perception were discovered. Among the most
well-known are laws involving proximity (objects that
are closer together are more likely to be seen as belonging together); similarity (similar elements are perceived
as belonging together); continuity (sensations that seem
to create a continuous form are perceived as belonging
together); closure (the tendency that makes people mentally fill in missing areas to create a whole); texture (the
tendency to group together items with a similar texture);
simplicity (grouping items together in the simplest way
possible); and common fate (grouping together sets of
objects moving in the same direction at the same speed).
Another well-known Gestalt concept illustrating the
significance of the whole involves the interdependence
of figure and ground. The Gestaltists introduced the idea
that perception occurs in “fields” consisting of a figure
(which receives most of the viewer’s attention) and a
ground (the background). Neither figure nor ground can
exist without the contrast they provide for each other:
thus, they form an inseparable whole that can only be
understood as part of a dynamic process greater than the
sum of its individual parts. (The phenomenon of figure
and ground is most often illustrated by the Rubin vase,
which can be perceived as either two dark profiles on a
white background, or a white vase on a dark background.) Köhler’s work with primates during this period
yielded important findings—transferable to humans—on
learning and problem solving that contributed further to
the body of Gestalt theory. His experiments emphasized
“insight learning,” through which the test subject finds a
solution to a problem by suddenly “seeing it whole”
rather than through random trial and error attempts, or
reward-driven conditioning. Hence, Köhler offered a
basis for viewing learning as the result of higher-level
thinking involving the creative reorganization of data to
produce new ways of envisioning a problem.
In 1921, Köhler was appointed to the most prestigious position in German psychology—directorship of
the Psychological Institute at the University of Berlin.
Under his leadership, it became a center for Gestalt
studies, which remained a major force in German psychology until the mid-1930s, when Nazi pressure led to
Köhler’s resignation and emigration to the United States.
Articles and books published in English by Kurt Koffka
had also popularized Gestalt psychology in the United
States beginning in 1922, and both Koffka and Köhler
received invitations to lecture in America throughout the
1920s. By the early 1930s, however, the Gestalt school
had become subordinated to the reigning enthusiasm for
behaviorism, a movement antithetical to its principles.
While the Gestaltists were at odds with many popular psychological views of their time, including those
held in introspective psychology, they did maintain the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

279

Gestalt psychology

and patterning of experience and of one’s perceptions.
Thus, they held that behavior must be studied in all its
complexity rather than separated into discrete components, and that perception, learning, and other cognitive
functions should be seen as structured wholes.

Eleanor J. Gibson

value of an unstructured form of introspection known as
“phenomenology.” Phenomenological investigation explored questions regarding personal perception of motion, size, and color and provided additional feedback regarding perception and its importance in psychological
experiences. This information influenced later perception-centered theories involving problem solving, memory, and learning.
See also Gestalt principles of organization
Further Reading
Köhler, Wolfgang. The Task of Gestalt Psychology. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1972.
McConville, Mark. Adolescence: Psychotherapy and the
Emergent Self. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1995.

Eleanor J. Gibson
1910Experimental psychologist noted for her work in
the field of perceptual development in children
and infants.

Gibson was born Eleanor Jack in Peoria, Illinois,
into a successful Presbyterian family on December 7,
1910. Her parents were William A. and Isabel (Grier)
Jack. She married fellow psychologist James J. Gibson
on September 17, 1932. They had two children, James J.
and Jean Grier.
Due to prevailing attitudes discouraging females—
even gifted ones—from pursuing an education, young
Eleanor was careful not to demonstrate her scholarly capabilities while at school. However, once ensconced in
the nurturing atmosphere of Smith College, at Cornell
University, where she completed her undergraduate degree in 1931, (and in 1933 her D.Sc.), she excelled in
scientific subjects and chose to study psychology, no
doubt encouraged by such eminent teachers as Kurt
Koffka, Fritz Heider, and James Gibson, who would
later become her husband.
Exceptionally brilliant, Jack was able to complete
all her graduate training except the thesis in one year at
Yale University. Her strength of character, confidence
in her own research and remarkable insight regarding observation enabled her to overcome many difficulties and
carve out a successful career. She was awarded her Ph.D.
from Yale in 1938 and taught at Cornell University until
her retirement in 1980.
Jack’s early career was hampered by many factors.
Firstly, she began in the period of the Great Depression.
280

It was particularly difficult for women to progress under
these conditions. Gender discrimination was still the
norm, and Robert Yerkes initially rejected her for postgraduate studies at Yale on this basis. She was also
wrongfully accused of incompetence at one point, and
the director of the laboratory later published her work as
his own. On another occasion, her research animals were
summarily removed from the laboratory. However, her
personal strength and enthusiasm for her work enabled
her to overcome these setbacks, and made no notable reverses to her distinguished career.
In 1932, after her marriage to James Gibson,
Eleanor Gibson became his assistant. She and her husband had similar views regarding rigorous attention to
detail when conducting research. In 1942, she went with
her husband to Fort Worth, and then on to Santa Ana,
California. During this time, her principal role was as
wife and mother. However, before long, boredom would
prompt her return to research.
In 1949, Gibson again accompanied her husband to
Cornell as an unpaid research associate. It was here that
she developed her theory of avoidance learning, based on
studies of children. At this time, she and her husband were
awarded a large Air Force grant, which enabled her to
begin her work on perceptual learning. In 1955, Gibson’s
first theory of perceptual learning, which was formulated
in collaboration with her husband, appeared. Two years
later, they again published the results of joint research, on
invariants under transformation. These papers later formed
the basis for James Gibson’s ecological theory.
Gibson’s original goal was to become a comparative
psychologist, and although at the time she did not have access to her own laboratory and was not able to pursue her
chosen field of research with children, she is acknowledged to have single-handedly developed the field. She
began work on the “Visual Cliff,” her best-known work,
with Richard Walk in the mid–1950’s. They discovered
that baby animals avoided a simulated cliff constructed by
suspending a piece of glass above the floor.
In 1975 Gibson was able to establish her own infant study laboratory. This enabled her to devote her research to ecological psychology, perhaps even more so
after her husband’s death in 1979. She has pursued her
work on perceptual development, more recently concentrating on the concept of affordance. Gibson is also
an active member of the International Society for Ecological Psychology.
Gibson has been the recipient of many awards during her career, among them an award from the American
Psychological Association for distinguished scientific
contribution in 1968; in 1983 the national medal for science; in 1992 a lifetime achievement award.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Gibson’s major published work is possibly An
Odyssey in Learning and Perception, (1991), which consolidates much of her lifetime’s work. She also wrote
Principles of Perceptual Learning and Development, in
1967, for which she received the Century Award.
Gibson retired in 1980 and is Professor Emeritus at
Cornell University. Although now advanced in age, Professor Gibson continues to work at the Middlebury University in Vermont.
Patricia Skinner
Further Reading
Gibson, Eleanor J. An Odyssey in Learning and Perception
Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1991

James Jerome Gibson
1904-1979
American psychologist known for his work on visual perception.

James Jerome Gibson proposed a theory of vision
that was a first of its kind; he suggested that visual perception was the direct detection of environmental invariances, and that visual perception did not require inference or information processing.
Gibson was born in 1904 in McConnelsville, Ohio.
He started his undergraduate career at Northwestern University. He transferred to Princeton University, where he
earned his B.A. in 1925 and his Ph.D. in 1928. His dissertation research focused on memory and learning. During
his career he taught psychology at Smith College between 1928 and 1949 and then went on to teach at Cornell between 1949 and 1972. At Smith, Gibson met Kurt
Koffka, a proponent of Gestalt psychology. Koffka’s influence shaped Gibson’s future research and practice.
Gibson served in World War II and during his time in
the service he directed the U.S. Air Force Research Unit
in Aviation Psychology. In the Army, Gibson developed
tests used to screen potential pilots. In doing so, he made
the observation that more information could be drawn

from moving pictures, such as film, than static ones. This
observation sparked his interest in visual perception.
After the war, Gibson returned to Smith for a brief
period before moving to Cornell. Gibson married
Eleanor Jack Gibson, who became a major psychologist
in her own right. Together they had two sons. In 1950
Gibson published The Perception of the Visual World
which outlined his ground breaking theory of visual perception. In this publication, Gibson asserted that texture
gradients on the ground are linked to similar gradients
found on the retina in the eye. These complementary gradients allow humans to have depth perception. He further suggested that a new branch of science, called ecological optics, was needed to study perceptions in more
detail. His next book, The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems, outlined this new discipline in detail.
Gibson’s theory was that of direct perception, which
means that humans directly perceive their environment
through stimulation of the retina. Traditionally, and especially by Gestalt psychologists, perception was believed
to be indirect. According to this theory, humans do not
directly perceive their environment. It is only through
sensory stimulation over time that we learn what is in
our environments, and that we perceive much more than
mere sensory input.
Although Gibson’s theory was met with much criticism, it did help advance the study of perception.
Through his theory of ecological optics, the study of perception shifted from laboratory-created situations to real
environmental tests. His ideas also pushed further research into the areas of vision and perception. Gibson
died in 1979.
Catherine Dybiec Holm
Further Reading
Sheehy et al, eds. Biographical dictionary of psychology New
York: Routledge, 1997.

Giftedness
Above-average intellectual or creative ability, or
talent in a particular area, such as music, art, or
athletics.

Intellectual giftedness is generally indicated by an
IQ of least 125 or 130. People who are extremely creative are also considered gifted, although their giftedness
can be hard to identify by academic performance or standardized tests. Giftedness has been defined not only in

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

281

Giftedness

Apart from her work at Cornell, Gibson also taught
at many other universities, including the University of
Pennsylvania in 1984; visiting professor of psychology,
Emory University, 1988–90; distinguished visiting professor at the University of California, Davis, 1978; visiting professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology;
and the Institute of Child Development at the University
of Minnesota (1980).

Gross motor skills

terms of specific talents and academic abilities, but also
by general intellectual characteristics (including curiosity, motivation, ability to see relationships, and long attention span) and personality traits such as leadership
ability, independence, and intuitiveness. In general, gifted people are creative, innovative thinkers who are able
to envision multiple approaches to a problem and devise
innovative and unusual solutions to it.
In the early days of intelligence testing it was widely thought that a person’s mental abilities were genetically determined and varied little throughout the life
span, but it is now believed that nurture plays a significant role in giftedness. Researchers comparing the behavior of parents of gifted and average children have
found significant differences in childrearing practices.
The parents of gifted children spend more time reading
to them and encouraging creative types of play and are
more involved with their schooling. They are also more
likely to actively encourage language development and
expose their children to cultural resources outside the
home, including those not restricted specifically to children, such as art and natural history museums. The involvement of fathers in a child’s academic progress has
been found to have a positive effect on both boys and
girls in elementary school in terms of both grades and
achievement test scores. Within the family, grandparents can also play a positive role as mentors, listeners,
and role models. A disproportionately large percentage
of high-achieving women have reported that at least one
grandparent played a significant role in their lives during childhood. (The anthropologist Margaret Mead
named her paternal grandmother as the person with the
single greatest influence on her life.) Even within a single family, giftedness can be influenced by such environmental factors as birth order, gender, differences in
treatment by parents, and other unique aspects of a particular child’s experiences.
Standardized intelligence tests—most often the
Stanford-Binet or Wechsler tests—almost always play a
role in assessing giftedness, even though such tests have
been criticized on a variety of grounds, including an
overly narrow definition of intelligence, possible racial
and cultural bias, and the risk of unreliability due to variations in testing conditions. Critics have questioned the
correlation of IQ scores with achievement later in life,
pointing out that standardized tests don’t measure many
of the personal qualities that contribute to professional
success, such as independence, motivation, persistence,
and interpersonal skills. In addition, the creativity and
intuition that are hallmarks of giftedness may actually
lower a person’s scores on tests that ask for a single solution to a problem rather than rewarding the ability to envision multiple solutions, a trait—called divergent
282

thinking by psychologists and educators—that often
characterizes giftedness.
Further Reading
Sternberg, Robert J. and Janet E. Davidson, eds. Conceptions of
Giftedness. London: Cambridge University Press, 1986.

Gross motor skills
The abilities required in order to control the large
muscles of the body for walking, running, sitting,
crawling, and other activities.

Motor skills are deliberate and controlled movements requiring both muscle development and maturation of the central nervous system. In addition, the
skeletal system must be strong enough to support the
movement and weight involved in any new activity. Once
these conditions are met, children learn new physical
skills by practicing them until each skill is mastered.
Gross motor skills, like fine motor skills —which
involve control of the fingers and hands—develop in an
orderly sequence. Although norms for motor development have been charted in great detail by researchers and
clinicians over the past 50 years, its pace varies considerably from one child to the next. The more complex the
skills, the greater the possible variation in normal children. The normal age for learning to walk has a range of
several months, while the age range for turning one’s
head, a simpler skill that occurs much earlier, is considerably narrower. In addition to variations among children, an individual child’s rate of progress varies as well,
often including rapid spurts of development and frustrating periods of delay. Although rapid motor development
in early childhood is often a good predictor of coordination and athletic ability later in life, there is no proven
correlation between a child’s rate of motor development
and his intelligence. In most cases, a delay in mastering
a specific motor skill is temporary and does not indicate
a serious problem. However, medical help should be
sought if a child is significantly behind his peers in
motor development or if he regresses, losing previously
acquired skills.

Infancy and toddlerhood
The sequence of gross motor development is determined by two developmental principles that also govern
physical growth. The cephalo-caudal pattern, or head-totoe development, refers to the way the upper parts of the
body, beginning with the head, develop before the lower
ones. Thus, infants can lift their heads and shoulders be-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

One of the major tasks in gross motor development
is locomotion, or the ability to move from one place to
another. An infant progresses gradually from rolling (8 to
10 weeks) to creeping on her stomach and dragging her
legs behind her (6 to 9 months) to actual crawling (7
months to a year). While the infant is learning these temporary means of locomotion, she is gradually becoming
able to support increasing amounts of weight while in a
standing position. In the second half year of life, babies
begin pulling themselves up on furniture and other stationary objects. By the ages of 28 to 54 weeks, on average, they begin “cruising,” or navigating a room in an
upright position by holding on to the furniture to keep
their balance. Eventually, they are able to walk while
holding on to an adult with both hands, and then with
only one. They usually take their first uncertain steps
alone between the ages of 36 and 64 weeks and are competent walkers by the ages of 52 to 78 weeks. By the age
of two years, children have begun to develop a variety of
gross motor skills. They can run fairly well and negotiate
stairs holding on to a banister with one hand and putting
both feet on each step before going on to the next one.
Most infants this age climb (some very actively) and
have a rudimentary ability to kick and throw a ball.

Preschool
During a child’s first two years, most parents consider gross motor skills a very high priority; a child’s
first steps are the most universally celebrated developmental milestone. By the time a child is a preschooler,
however, many parents shift the majority of their attention to the child’s cognitive development in preparation
for school. In addition, gross motor activity at these ages
requires increasing amounts of space, equipment, and
supervision. However, gross motor skills remain very
important to a child’s development, and maintaining a
youngster’s instinctive love of physical activity can make
an important contribution to future fitness and health.

By the age of three, children walk with good posture
and without watching their feet. They can also walk
backwards and run with enough control for sudden stops
or changes of direction. They can hop, stand on one foot,
and negotiate the rungs of a jungle gym. They can walk
up stairs alternating feet but usually still walk down
putting both feet on each step. Other achievements include riding a tricycle and throwing a ball, although they
have trouble catching it because they hold their arms out
in front of their bodies no matter what direction the ball
comes from. Four-year-olds can typically balance or hop
on one foot, jump forward and backward over objects,
and climb and descend stairs alternating feet. They can
bounce and catch balls and throw accurately. Some fouryear-olds can also skip. Children this age have gained an
increased degree of self-consciousness about their motor
activities that leads to increased feelings of pride and
success when they master a new skill. However, it can
also create feelings of inadequacy when they think they
have failed. This concern with success can also lead
them to try daring activities beyond their abilities, so
they need to be monitored especially carefully.

School-age
School-age children, who are not going through the
rapid, unsettling growth spurts of early childhood or
adolescence, are quite skilled at controlling their bodies
and are generally good at a wide variety of physical activities, although the ability varies on the level of maturation and the physique of a child. Motor skills are mostly
equal in boys and girls at this stage, except that boys
have more forearm strength and girls have greater flexibility. Five-year-olds can skip, jump rope, catch a
bounced ball, walk on their tiptoes, balance on one foot
for over eight seconds, and engage in beginning acrobatics. Many can even ride a small two-wheeler bicycle.
Eight- and nine-year-olds typically can ride a bicycle,
swim, roller-skate, ice-skate, jump rope, scale fences,
use a saw, hammer, and garden tools, and play a variety
of sports. However, many of the sports prized by adults,
often scaled down for play by children, require higher
levels of distance judgment and hand-eye coordination,
as well as quicker reaction times, than are reasonable for
middle childhood. Games that are well suited to the
motor skills of elementary school-age children include
kick ball, dodge ball, and team relay races.
In adolescence, children develop increasing coordination and motor ability. They also gain greater physical
strength and prolonged endurance. Adolescents are able
to develop better distance judgment and hand-eye coordination than their younger counterparts. With practice,
they can master the skills necessary for adult sports.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

283

Gross motor skills

fore they can sit up, which, in turn, precedes standing
and walking. The other pattern of both development and
maturation is proximo-distal, or trunk to extremities.
One of the first things an infant achieves is head control.
Although they are born with virtually no head or neck
control, most infants can lift their heads to a 45-degree
angle by the age of four to six weeks, and they can lift
both their heads and chests at an average age of eight
weeks. Most infants can turn their heads to both sides
within 16 to 20 weeks and lift their heads while lying on
their backs within 24 to 28 weeks. By about 36 to 42
weeks, or 9 to 10 months, most infants can sit up unassisted for substantial periods of time with both hands
free for playing.

Group therapy

Further Reading
Eckert, Helen M. Motor Development. 3rd ed. Indianapolis,
IN: Benchmark Press, 1987.
Hoppert, Rita. Rings, Swings, and Climbing Things. Chicago:
Contemporary Books, 1985.
Lerch, Harold A., and Christine B. Stopka. Developmental
Motor Activities for All Children: From Theory to Practice. Dubuque, IA: Brown and Benchmark, 1992.
Thomas, Jerry R., ed. Motor Development in Childhood and
Adolescence. Minneapolis, MN: Burgess Publishing Co.,
1984.

Group therapy
The simultaneous treatment of several clients who
meet regularly under the guidance of a therapist to
obtain relief from particular symptoms or to pursue
personal change.

Group therapy has numerous advantages over individual therapy. The therapist’s knowledge about the
clients offers an added dimension through the opportuni-

ty of observing them interact with each other. Clients are
helped by listening to others discuss their problems (including problems more severe than theirs) and by realizing that they are not alone. They also gain hope by
watching the progress of other members and experience
the satisfaction of being helpful to others. Groups give
the individual client the chance to model positive behavior they observe in others. Besides learning from each
other, the trust and cohesiveness developed within the
group can bolster each member’s self-confidence and interpersonal skills. Group therapy gives clients an opportunity to test these new skills in a safe environment. In
addition, the group experience may be therapeutic by offering the clients a chance to reenact or revise the way in
which they relate to their primary families. Finally,
group therapy is cost-effective, reducing the use of the
therapist’s total time.
The average group has six to twelve clients who
meet at least once a week. All matters discussed by the
group remain confidential. The therapist’s functions include facilitating member participation and interaction,
focusing conversation, mediating conflicts among members, offering emotional support when needed, facilitat-

Group therapy sessions often take place in a home-like environment to make members feel more comfortable. (Will & Deni
McIntyre. Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

284

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Nevertheless, there are also some possible disadvantages to group therapy. Some clients may be less comfortable speaking openly in a group setting than in individual therapy, and some group feedback may actually
be harmful to members. In addition, the process of group
interaction itself may become a focal point of discussion,
consuming a disproportionate amount of time compared
with that spent on the actual problems from which its
members are seeking relief. There are many different
types of therapy groups, and a wide variety of approaches are used in them. Some groups are organized around a
specific problem (such as alcohol dependence) or a type
of client (such as single parents), or with the goal of acquiring a particular skill (such as assertiveness training).
Groups can be open or closed to accepting new members
after the initial session, and their meetings may be either
time-limited or open-ended sessions.
Group therapy first came into widespread practice
following World War II and employs numerous methods
of psychotherapy, including psychodynamic, behavioral, and phenomenological. In Fritz Perls’s application
of his Gestalt approach to group work, the therapist
tends to work with one group member at a time. Other
approaches, such as J.L. Moreno’s psychodrama (role
playing) method, stresses the interaction among group
members. Psychodrama calls for the group to act out
scenes relevant to the situation of a particular member
under the therapist’s guidance. Influenced by Moreno’s
approach, new action-based methods were introduced in
the 1960s, including encounter groups, sensitivity training, marathon groups, and transactional analysis, whose
foremost spokesperson was Eric Berne. Marathon
groups, which can last for extended periods of time, are
geared toward wearing down the members’ defenses to
allow for more intense interaction. In addition to the
adaptation of individual psychotherapeutic methods for
groups, the popularity of group therapy has also grown
out of the development of methods initially intended for
groups, including Kurt Lewin’s work with T-groups at
the National Training Laboratories in Bethel, Maine,
during the 1940s and similar work by researchers at the
Tavistock Institute in London.
Group therapy is practiced in a variety of settings,
including both inpatient and outpatient facilities, and is
used to treat anxiety, mood, and personality disorders as
well as psychoses. Since the 1980s, techniques borrowed
from group therapy have been widely used by a profusion of self-help groups consisting of people who share
a specific problem or situation ranging from single parenthood and overeating to drug addiction, child abuse,
and cancer. The primary difference of these groups from

traditional group therapy sessions is the absence of facilitation by a mental health professional.
Further Reading
Friedman, William H. Practical Group Therapy: A Guide for
Clinicians. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1989.
Helmering, Doris Wild. Group Therapy—Who Needs It? Millbrae, CA: Celestial Arts, 1976.

Guilt
An emotional state produced by thoughts that we
have not lived up to our ideal self and could have
done otherwise.

Guilt is both a cognitive and an emotional experience that occurs when a person realizes that he or she
has violated a moral standard and is responsible for that
violation. A guilty conscience results from thoughts that
we have not lived up to our ideal self. Guilt feelings may
also inhibit us from falling short of our ideal again in the
future. Individual guilt is an inner reflection on personal
wrongdoing, while collective guilt is a shared state resulting from group—such as corporate, national, or community—wrongdoing.

STAGES OF GUILT
DEVELOPMENT
The researcher M. L. Hoffman has proposed the
following stages of guilt development:
Infancy—Because infants have no clear sense of
separate identity or the effect of their behavior on others, it would be impossible for them to feel true guilt
over hurting another.
Early childhood—Young children understand themselves as physically separate from others, but do not yet
have a deep understanding of others’ inner states; therefore, they feel guilt over hurting another person physically, but not over doing emotional damage.
Middle childhood—With the increased understanding of others’ inner states, children develop a
sense of guilt over inflicting emotional pain on others or
failing to act on another’s behalf.
Adolescence to adulthood—Cognitive development now allows the young adult to perceive abstract,
universal concepts of identity and suffering and, therefore, to feel a sense of guilt over more general harm,
such as world hunger, poverty, oppression, etc.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

285

Guilt

ing the establishment of group rules, and ensuring that
the rules are followed.

Edwin Ray Guthrie

Guilt serves as both an indicator and inhibitor of
wrongdoing. Healthy guilt is an appropriate response to
harming another and is resolved through atonement,
such as making amends, apologizing, or accepting punishment. Unhealthy guilt, sometimes called neurotic or
debilitating guilt, is a pervasive sense of responsibility
for others’ pain that is not resolved, despite efforts to
atone. Healthy guilt inspires a person to behave in the
best interests of him- or herself and others and make
amends when any wrong is done. Unhealthy guilt stifles
a person’s natural expression of self and prohibits intimacy with others.
Unhealthy guilt can be instilled when a child is
continually barraged with shaming statements that criticize the child’s self, rather than focusing on the specific
harmful behavior. A statement such as, “It is wrong to
take someone else’s things without permission—please
return my book,” creates an appropriate awareness in
the child of healthy guilt for doing wrong. Saying,
“Give me my book back! I can’t trust you with anything!” shames the child, declaring that he or she is by
nature untrustworthy and will never be better than a
thief, regardless of future behavior. Consequently, the
child sees his or her identity as defective, and may feel
powerless to atone for any wrongdoings. This identity
can be carried into adulthood, creating a sense of debilitating guilt.
An important difference between shame and guilt is
that in the former, a person does not feel he could have
avoided the action; in guilt, he feels responsible. Guilt
can be used to manipulate someone into behaving in a
certain way. This is known as a “guilt trip.” Provoking
another’s sense of guilt in order to obtain something that
he or she might not otherwise have offered is a manipulation of internal motivations. If a woman tells her husband that she is going out for the evening with her girlfriends, and her husband responds, “Go ahead and go to
the movie, dear . . . don’t worry about me . . . I’ll be fine
here all by myself in this big old house all evening with
nothing to do . . ., ” the wife will be made to feel guilty
for her husband’s loneliness. If the guilt trip is heavy, the
wife may decide to stay home with the husband, even
though she really wants to go to the movie.
It is appropriate to let people know when they have
unnecessarily or intentionally hurt others, or have ignored their responsibilities to others. This will instill fair
guilt that will help a person be less hurtful in the future.
Although conclusive studies have yet to be conducted, it is likely that the sense of guilt changes along with a
person’s cognitive and social development. These stages
have yet to be thoroughly documented and are still open
to critique.
286

Guilt can be deactivated, the conscience “turned
off.” Some people never seem to develop a healthy sense
of guilt in the first place, through a failure to develop
empathy or a lack of appropriate limits, while others
choose to turn theirs off. Guilt can be deactivated in two
different ways:
1) The person convinces him- or herself that the act
was not a violation of what is right.
2) The person reasons that he or she has no control
over the events of life and is therefore not responsible for
the outcome. With no sense of personal responsibility,
there can be no sense of guilt.
When guilt is reduced, internal limits on behavior
disappear and people can act without remorse.
See also Moral development; Self-conscious emotions
Dianne K. Daeg de Mott
Further Reading
Greenspan, P.S. Practical Guilt: Moral Dilemmas, Emotions,
and Social Norms. New York/Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1995.
Hoffman, M. L. “Development of Prosocial Motivation: Empathy and Guilt.” In The Development of Prosocial
Behavior, edited by N. Eisenberg, pp. 218-31. New York:
Academic Press, 1982.
Kurtines, William M., and Jacob L. Gewirtz, eds. Moral Development: An Introduction. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1995.
Middleton-Moz, Jane. Shame and Guilt: Masters of Disguise.
Deerfield Beach, FL: Health Communications, 1990.
Wechsler, Harlan J. What’s So Bad About Guilt? Learning to
Live With It Since We Can’t Live Without It. New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1990.

Edwin Ray Guthrie
1886-1959
American psychologist primarily noted for his work
in evolving a single simple theory of learning.

Edwin Guthrie, born Jan. 9, 1886, in Lincoln, Nebraska, was one of five children. His mother was a
schoolteacher, and his father a store manager. He received a bachelor’s and a master’s degree from the University of Nebraska, specializing in mathematics, philosophy, and psychology. He entered the University of
Pennsylvania as a Harrison fellow, receiving his doctorate in 1912. His educational training and background reflect his analytical frame of reference in his psychological writings.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In the latter part of the 1920s Guthrie concerned
himself with such topics as fusion on nonmusical intervals, measurement of introversion and extroversion,
and purpose and mechanism in psychology. He seemed
more inclined toward the exploration of learning in the
1930s and thereafter.
Much honored, Guthrie was elected president of the
American Psychological Association. During World
War II he was a lieutenant in the U.S. Army, serving as a
consultant to the overseas branch of the general staff of
the War Department and Office of War Information. He
was made dean of the graduate school at the University
of Washington in 1943.

Edwin Ray Guthrie (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

Guthrie taught high school mathematics for five
years in Lincoln and Philadelphia. In 1914 he joined the
University of Washington as an instructor in the department of philosophy, changing to the department of psychology five years later. During his rise to full professor
in 1928, he developed his learning theory in association
with Stevenson Smith, who was then department chairman of psychology at Washington.
Guthrie married Helen MacDonald of Berkeley,
Calif., in June 1920. They traveled widely, and in France
Guthrie met Pierre Janet, whose Principles of Psychotherapy he translated with his wife. Janet’s writing
had a great influence on Guthrie’s thinking. To Janet’s

Guthrie was considered a behaviorist. Behaviorism
was a school of psychology which felt that psychology
as a science must be predicated on a study of what is observable. Behaviorists excluded self-observation as a scientific method of investigation and preferred experimentation. They examined the concept of association
and its limits in explaining how learning takes place.
Guthrie’s interpretations in his writings are based on the
theory of learning: “A combination of stimuli which has
accompanied a movement will on its recurrence tend to
be followed by that movement.”
In his theory Guthrie avoids mention of drives, successive repetitions, rewards, or punishment. He refers to
stimuli and movement in combination. There is one type
of learning; the same principle which applies for learning in one instance also applies for learning in all instances. The difference seen in learning does not arise
from there being different kinds of learning but rather
from different kinds of situations.
See also Learning theory
Further Reading
Hilgard, Ernest R. Theories of learning. 1948. 3rd ed. 1966.
Bugelski, Bergen Richard. The psychology of learning. 1956.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

287

Edwin Ray Guthrie

descriptive psychology and physiological concepts as
sources of action, Guthrie added an objective theory of
learning.

H
Jay Haley
1923American psychologist known for his work in family therapy.

Jay Haley is an American psychologist recognized
as one of the founders of family therapy. Haley was a
cofounder of the Family Therapy Institute in Washington, D.C., and he created the publication Family Process.
His contributions to the field of therapy include the development of strategic and humanistic processes.
Haley was born on July 19, 1923, in Midwest,
Wyoming, to Andrew J. and Mary (Sneddon) Haley. On
December 25, 1950, Haley married the musician Elizabeth Kuehn. They had three children: Kathleen, Andrew,
and Gregory; and were later divorced in 1971. Haley received his B.A. from the University of California, Los
Angeles, in 1948. He later earned a B.L.S. from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1951 and an M.A.
from Stanford University in 1953.
Haley’s career reflected his interest in family therapy, particularly in later years. He first served as a research associate between 1953 and 1962 in the Project
for Study of Communication, Veterans Administration
and Stanford University, Palo Alto, California. Between
1962 and 1967 Haley was director of family experimentation at the Mental Research Institute in Palo Alto. He
served as the director of family research between 1967
and 1974 at the Philadelphia Child Guidance Clinic. Beginning in 1974, Haley was appointed as director of the
Family Therapy Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland,
where he serves currently.
Haley published a number of works relating to family therapy. These include Techniques of Family Therapy
(with Lynn Hoffman) in 1967, Leaving Home in 1981,
and Reflections on Therapy in 1982. Other therapy-related works include Uncommon Therapy in 1972 and
Strategies of Psychotherapy in 1963. He also wrote The
288

Power Tactics of Jesus Christ: And Other Essays in 1969
and edited Changing Families (1971) and Advanced
Techniques of Hypnosis and Therapy (1967). Haley received the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Milton
H. Erickson Foundation.
Catherine Dybiec Holm
Further Reading
Haley, Jay and D.R. Grove. Conversations on Therapy: Popular Problems and Uncommon Solutions. New York: W.W.
Norton & Co., 1993.
Haley, Jay. Learning and Teaching Therapy. New York: Guilford Press, 1996.
Haley, Jay. Leaving Home: The Therapy of Disturbed Young
People. New York: Taylor & Francis, 1997.
Haley, Jay. Problem-Solving Therapy. San Francisco: JosseyBass Publishers, 1991.
Haley, Jay. Strategies of Psychotherapy. New York: Triangle
Press/W.W. Norton & Co., 1990.

Halfway house
A live-in treatment facility for individuals who have
completed inpatient, or hospital-based psychiatric
treatment, but who are not prepared to make a full
transition to independent living.

Halfway houses are typically staffed by therapists,
counselors, social workers, other mental healthcare professionals, or lay-people with a background in the treatment area. Time spent both in and away from the house is
highly structured. Residents are allowed to leave the facility for work and school, but are assigned housekeeping
or other tasks that contribute to the house and its residents
during their residential time. Attendance at on-site group
therapy or support group meetings is usually required.
The average length of stay in a halfway house
ranges from three months to a year. Both co-ed and gen-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Applications
A period of residence in a halfway house is often
recommended when a controlled social environment is
critical for the patient’s continued recovery (e.g., with individuals leaving inpatient alcohol and/or drug rehabilitation facilities), or in cases of long-term mental illness
(e.g., schizophrenia) where vocational rehabilitation
(job training) and development of life skills is required.
As its name implies, the halfway house is a transitional treatment setting halfway between the intensive
structured setting of an inpatient facility and independent
living. The halfway house is designed to put theories and
new behaviors discussed and experimented with during
treatment into actual practice. Patients can interact with
peers and develop healthy social relationships in a safe
environment. Ideally, the new life skills and coping techniques they acquire will become habit before the patient
is released and reintegrated into the community.
Halfway houses geared towards individuals without
chronic mental illnesses also exist. Halfway residences
for battered and abused women are in operation, and
these facilities frequently provide access to mental
health counseling and support groups for their residents
as well as job training to prepare them for financial independence. And in some states, halfway houses are used
as a transitory residence for low-risk prisoners in order
to keep prison populations down and facilitate the transition from prison life back into society.

Origins
In late 18th-century England, halfway houses were
created to house, rehabilitate, and care for child criminals who were arrested for minor crimes such as theft. In
1896, Maud Ballington Booth, the co-founder of Volunteers of America and an advocate for prison reform,
opened the first privately owned U.S. halfway house.
Hope Hall No. 1, which was located in New York, met
with great success, and Hope Hall No. 2 in Chicago soon
followed. The halls were designed to reintroduce released convicts to the community, get them jobs, and
nurse them back to health after serving their sentences in
the disease-ridden prisons of the time. By 1902, over
3000 prisoners had passed through the doors of Hope
Halls 1 and 2. The facilities declined in popularity after
states began to adopt parole policies, but experienced a
resurgence in popularity after World War II. Volunteers

of America still operates Hope Hall facilities in conjunction with state correctional facilities today.

Admission requirements
Individuals who are considered to be at risk for
harming themselves or others and those who have a history of fleeing treatment facilities are not suitable candidates for halfway house residency. Halfway houses usually require residents to be self-sufficient (e.g., hygiene
and other basic self-care skills), and to be free of any severe physical impairment that would require ongoing
medical care. Other requirements may exist for admittance into specific halfway house programs.
Paula Ford-Martin
Further Reading
Flannery, Mary and Mark Glickman. Fountain House: Portraits
of Lives Reclaimed from Mental Illness. Center City, MN:
Hazeldon Information & Educational Services, 1996.

Further Information
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). 6001 Executive
Boulevard, Rm. 8184, MSC 9663, Bethesda, MD, USA.
20892-9663, fax: 301-443-4279, 301-443-4513. Email:
nimhinfo@nih.gov. http://www.nimh.nih.gov.

Granville Stanley Hall
1844-1924
American psychologist.

Granville Stanley Hall played a decisive role in the
organization of American psychology. He invited Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung to America, thus contributing to the diffusion of psychoanalysis. Above all, he gave
a crucial impetus to the study of the child and the life
cycle (his last psychological book dealt with senescence,
the process of becoming old). Hall stressed the social relevance of empirical developmental research, and authored the first major treatise on adolescence. His theories and methods have since been superseded, but the lifespan, stage-based perspective typical of this thinking became a central component of modern psychology.
Hall was born in 1844 in rural Massachusetts, the
son of educated farmers. He studied at Williams College
and at the Union Theological Seminary; in 1878 he received a Ph.D. from Harvard University for a thesis on
the role of muscular sensations in space perception. He
then studied with Wilhelm Wundt and Hermann Ludwig Ferdinand von Helmholtz in Germany. He joined

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

289

Granville Stanley Hall

der specific halfway residences are in operation in the
United States. Many halfway houses are converted apartment buildings or large private residences, and are often
located in residential areas.

Hallucinations

and dispositions, a capacity for religious conversion, and
an unlimited creative potential. Hall claimed that it was
essential to channel these energies (especially sexual),
and that it was “the apical stage of human development”
and the starting point “for the super anthropoid that man
is to become.” His idealized and lyrical depiction of adolescence synthesized common nineteenth-century ideas
about youth into a evolutionary framework and, while
conveying nostalgia for a lost closeness to nature, provided an increasingly urban and industrialized society
with a confident image of its own future.
Further Reading
Hall, G. S. Adolescence: Its Psychology and its Relations to
Physiology, Anthropology, Sociology, Sex, Crime, Religion and Education. 2 vols., New York: Appleton, 1908.
———. Life and Confessions of a Psychologist. New York:
Appleton, 1923.
Ross, D. G. Stanley Hall: The Psychologist as Prophet. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972.

Hallucinations
Compelling perceptual experiences which may be
visual, tactile, olfactory, or auditory, but which lack
a physical stimulus.

Granville Stanley Hall (The Library of Congress. Reproduced
with permission.)

Johns Hopkins University in 1884, set up one of the first
psychology laboratories in the U.S., and established the
American Journal of Psychology to promote experimental psychology. In 1889, he became the first president of
Clark University, which awarded many of the early
American doctorates in psychology. He led a popular
child-study and educational reform movement, which he
supported through his journal Pedagogical Seminary. He
inspired and was the first president of the American
Psychological Association. Hall died in 1924.

Although hallucinations are false perceptions, they
carry the force of reality and are a definitive sign of
mental illness. Hallucinations may be caused by organic
deterioration or functional disorders, and can occur in
normal people while asleep or awake, or as a result of
sensory deprivation. Generally not positive experiences, hallucinations are often described as frightening
and distressing. A person under a hallucinatory state may
be either alert and intelligent or incoherent, depending
on the type and degree of the disturbance.

Hall studied childhood by means of questionnaires
(a method he pioneered) on topics such as children’s
play, lies, fears, anger, language, and art. He distributed
them among teachers, thus amassing huge amounts of
data. The backbone of Hall’s thinking was the concept of
recapitulation, according to which individual development repeats the history of the species. As supposedly
apparent in children’s games, childhood reflected primitive humanity. The following, “juvenile” stage corresponded to an age when humans were well adjusted to
their environment and displayed tribal inclinations; it
was therefore suited to the formation of groups adapted
to the child’s “social instinct.” Adolescence was a “new
birth” that brought forth ancestral passions, an age of
“storm and stress” characterized by conflicting moods

One psychological condition commonly characterized by hallucinations is schizophrenia. In schizophrenia, the hallucinations are usually auditory, involving one
or more voices. The voices may issue commands, comment on or seem to narrate the person’s actions, or sound
like an overheard conversation, and can be analyzed for
greater insight into the patient’s emotional state. Auditory
hallucinations can also occur in severe depression and
mania; seriously depressed persons may hear voices
making derogatory remarks about them or threatening
them with bodily harm. Visual hallucinations, on the
other hand, are more likely to characterize organic neurological disturbances, such as epilepsy, and may occur
prior to an epileptic seizure. Hallucinations involving the
senses of smell and touch are less frequent than visual or

290

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Hallucinations can also be induced by ingesting
drugs that alter the chemistry of the brain. (The technical
name used for drug-induced hallucinations is hallucinosis.) The most widely known hallucinogens, or mindaltering drugs, are LSD, psilocybin, peyote, and mescaline, which act on the brain to produce perceptual, sensory, and cognitive experiences that are not occurring in reality. Effects vary from user to user and also individually
from one experience to the next. Hallucinations produced
by LSD are usually visual in nature. On an LSD “trip,”
for example, hallucinations can last eight to ten hours
while those produced by mescaline average six to eight
hours. Two illegal drugs manufactured to produce psychoactive effects, PCP (phencyclidine) and MDMA (Ecstasy), are not true hallucinogens, but both produce hallucinations of body image as well as psychoses. A person
may also experience hallucinations while attempting to
withdraw from a drug, such as “pink elephants” and other
visual hallucinations from alcohol withdrawal. Withdrawal symptoms from cocaine are associated with the hallucinatory tactile sensation of something crawling under
one’s skin, often termed “the cocaine bug.”
Other causes of hallucinations are hypnosis, lack of
sleep, stress, illness, and fatigue, which can produce a
rare and unique hallucination known as “the doppelganger.” A person who has this experience sees his or her
mirror image facing him or her three or four feet away,
appearing as a transparent projection on a glassy surface.
The hypnagogic hallucinations that occur in the zone between sleep and waking are both visual and auditory, and
are strikingly detailed to those who can remember them.
Sensory deprivation in subjects of laboratory experiments over a period of time has also been shown to produce hallucinations, as has electrical stimulation of the
brain. Experiences called pseudohallucinations involve
the perception of vivid images without the sense that
they are actually located in external space—the perceiver
recognizes that they are not real. Associated with isolation and emotional distress, they include such examples
as shipwrecked sailors visualizing rescue boats or travelers stranded in the desert visualizing an oasis. Pseudohallucinations do not have the same psychiatric significance as true hallucinations.
People suffering from hallucinations may try to conceal them from others because of their negative connotations, and may receive more drastic forms of treatment
or inadequate prognoses because of them. In contrast to
mainstream cultural opinion, however, users of hallu-

cinogens in the United States view hallucinations as positive and potentially enlightening, and in other cultures
they are regarded for their healing faculties. In the
Moche culture of coastal Peru, for example, traditional
healers may ingest mescaline as part of a healing ritual
in the belief that the hallucinations produced by it offer
insight into the patient’s condition and thus aid in the
healing process.
Further Reading
Andrews, Barbara. Dreams and Waking Visions: A Journal.
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1989.
Guiley, Rosemary. The Encyclopedia of Dreams: Symbols and
Interpretations. New York: Crossroad, 1993.

Hallucinogens
Substances that cause hallucination—perception of
things or feelings that have no foundation in reality—when ingested.

Hallucinogens, or psychedelics, are substances that
alter users’ thought processes or moods to the extent that
they perceive objects or experience sensations that in
fact have no basis in reality. Many natural and some synthetic substances have the ability to bring about hallucinations. In fact, because of the ready market for such
chemicals, they are manufactured in illegal chemical laboratories for sale as hallucinogens. LSD (lysergic acid
diethylamide) and many so-called designer drugs have
no useful clinical function.
Hallucinogens have long been a component in the religious rites of various cultures, both in the New and Old
Worlds. Among the oldest are substances from mushrooms or cactus that have been in use in Native American
rites since before recorded history. Hallucinogenic mushrooms have been used for centuries in rites of medicine
men to foresee the future or communicate with the gods.
The mushroom is consumed by eating it or by drinking a
beverage in which the mushroom has been boiled. The effects are similar to those experienced by an LSD user—
enhancement of colors and sounds, introspective interludes, perception of nonexistent or absent objects or persons, and sometimes terrifying, ominous visions.
Another ancient, natural hallucinogenic substance is
derived from the Mexican peyote cactus. The flowering
head of the cactus contains a potent alkaloid called
mescaline. Hallucinogenic substances can be found in a
number of other plant species.
In the 1960s, hallucinogens were discovered and
embraced by the hippie movement, which incorporated
drugs into its culture. In addition, artists, poets, and writ-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

291

Hallucinogens

auditory ones; however, tactile hallucinations have
proven useful in the study and diagnosis of schizophrenia. Together with fearfulness and agitation, hallucinations are also a component of delirium tremens, which
can afflict persons suffering from alcohol dependence.

Hallucinations

ers of the time believed that the use of hallucinogens enhanced their creative prowess.
Use of LSD, the most widely known hallucinogen,
declined after large numbers of users experienced serious, sometimes fatal, effects during the 1960s. In the
United States, LSD was classified as a Schedule I drug
according to the Controlled Substance Act of 1970. That
designation is reserved for those drugs considered unsafe,
medically useless, and with a high potential for abuse.
LSD made a comeback in the 1990s, becoming the
most abused drug of people under 20 years of age. Its
low cost ($1 to $5 per “hit”), ready availability, and a renewed interest in 1960s culture are blamed for the resurgence. A 1993 survey reported that 13% of 18- to 25year-olds had used hallucinogens, in most cases LSD, at
least once.
Drugs such as LSD are often differentiated from less
potent psychedelics, which have the primary effect of inducing euphoria, relaxation, stimulation, relief from
pain, or relief from anxiety. This group of drugs is exemplified by marijuana, which is available worldwide
and constitutes one of the primary money crops in the
United States. Opiates such as heroin or morphine, phencyclidine (PCP), and certain tranquilizers such as diazepam (Valium) also belong to this category.
LSD was first synthesized in 1938 by Dr. Albert Hofmann, a Swiss chemist who was seeking a headache remedy. Years later, he accidentally ingested a small, unknown
quantity, and shortly afterward he was forced to stop his
work and go home. Hofmann lay in a darkened room and
later recorded in his diary that he was in a dazed condition
and experienced “an uninterrupted stream of fantastic images of extraordinary plasticity and vividness…accompanied by an intense kaleidoscope-like play of colors.”
Three days later, Hofmann purposely took another
dose of LSD to verify that his previous experience was
the result of taking the drug. He ingested what he
thought was a small dose (250 micrograms), but which is
actually about five times the amount needed to induce
pronounced hallucinations in an adult male. His second
hallucinatory experience was even more intense, and his
journal describes the symptoms of LSD toxicity: a
metallic taste, difficulty in breathing, dry and constricted
throat, cramps, paralysis, and visual disturbances.
LSD is one of the most potent hallucinogens known,
and no therapeutic benefits have been discovered. The
usual dose for an adult is 50-100 micrograms. (A microgram is a millionth of a gram.) Higher doses will produce more intense effects and lower doses will produce
milder effects. The so-called “acid trip” can be induced
by swallowing the drug, smoking it (usually with marijuana), injecting it, or rubbing it on the skin. Taken by
292

mouth, the drug will take about 30 minutes to have any
effect and up to an hour for its full effect to be felt,
which will last 2 to 4 hours.
The physiological effects of LSD include blurred vision, dilation of the pupils of the eye, muscle weakness
and twitching, and an increase in heart rate, blood pressure, and body temperature. The user may also salivate
excessively and shed tears, and the hair on the back of
his arms may stand erect. Pregnant women who use LSD
or other hallucinogens may have a miscarriage, because
these drugs cause the muscles of the uterus to contract.
Such a reaction in pregnancy would expel the fetus.
To the observer, the user usually will appear quiet
and introspective. Most of the time the user will be unwilling or unable to interact with others, to carry on a
conversation, or engage in intimacies. At times even moderate doses of LSD will have profoundly disturbing effects on an individual. Although the physiological effects
will seem uniform, the psychological impact of the drug
can be terrifying. The distortions in reality, exaggeration
of perception and other effects can be horrifying, especially if the user is unaware that he has been given the
drug. This constitutes what is called the “bad trip.”
Among the psychological effects reported by LSD
users is depersonalization, the separation from one’s
body, yet with the knowledge that the separated mind is
observing the passing scene. A confused body image
(the user cannot tell where his own body ends and the
surroundings begin) also is common. A distorted perception of reality is also common. For example, the user’s
perception of colors, distance, shapes, and sizes is inconsistent and unreliable. In addition, the user may perceive
absent objects and forms without substance. He may also
taste colors or smell sounds, a mixing of the senses
called synesthesia. Sounds, colors, and taste are all
greatly enhanced, though they may constitute an unrealistic and constantly changing tableau.
The user often talks incessantly on a variety of subjects, often uttering meaningless phrases. But he may
also become silent and immobile for long periods of time
as he listens to music or contemplates a flower or his
thumb. Mood swings are frequent, with sudden alternations between total euphoria and complete despair.
Some users will exhibit symptoms of paranoia.
They become suspicious of persons around them and
tend to withdraw from others. Feelings of anxiety can
also surface when the user is removed from a quiet environment and exposed to everyday stimuli. Activities such
as standing in line with other people or walking down a
city sidewalk may seem impossible to handle. Users
have been known to jump off buildings or walk in front
of moving trucks.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Discontinuing LSD or the other hallucinogens, especially after having used them for an extended period of
time, is not easy. The residual effects of the drugs produce toxic symptoms and “flashbacks,” which are similar to an LSD “trip.”
Currently, the most common form of LSD administration is by licking the back of a stamp torn from a perforated sheet of homemade stamps. The drug is coated
on the back of the sheet of stamps or is deposited as a
colored dot on the paper. Removing one stamp, the user
places it on his tongue and allows the LSD to dissolve in
his saliva. Because a tiny amount can produce strong effects, overdoses are common.
Teens often experiment with LSD or other hallucinogens in reaction to poor family relationships and
psychological problems. Others are prompted by curiosity, peer pressure, and the desire to escape from feelings
of isolation or despair. Typical physical signs of hallucinogen use include rapid breathing, muscle twitching,
chills and shaking, upset stomach, enlarged pupils, confusion, and poor coordination.
Further Reading
Robbins, Paul R. Hallucinogens. Springfield, NJ: Enslow, 1996.
Fernandes, B. “The Long, Strange Trip Back.” World Press Review 40, September 1993, pp. 38-39.
Monroe, Judy. “Designer Drugs: CAT & LSD.” Current Health
21, September 1994, p. 13.
“The Negative Side of Nostalgia.” Medical Update 17, July
1993, p. 3.
Porush, D. “Finding God in the Three-Pound Universe: The
Neuroscience of Transcendence.” Omni 16, October 1993,
pp. 60-62.

Halo effect
A type of bias where one characteristic of a person
or one factor in a situation affects the evaluation of
the person’s other traits.

Halo effect is a phenomenon that occurs when one is
influenced by a person’s strengths, weaknesses, physical

appearance, behavior, or any other single factor. The
halo effect is most often apparent in situations where one
person is responsible for evaluating or assessing another
in some way. Examples of such situations include assessment of applicants for jobs, scholarships, or awards; designating job or committee assignments based on perceived capabilities or past performance; and in evaluating academic, job, or athletic performance. The halo effect can undermine an individual’s effort to be objective
in making judgments because all people respond to others in a variety of ways, making true objectivity nearly
impossible. However, the halo effect causes one characteristic or quality of an individual to override all others.
To counteract the halo effect, decision makers can
break the evaluation process into specific steps, evaluating only one characteristic at a time, but human judgments can never be free of complex influences.

Handedness
A person’s preference for one hand when performing manual tasks.

The term handedness describes a characteristic form
of specialization whereby a person by preference uses
one hand for clearly identified activities, such as writing.
For example, a person who uses his or her right hand for
activities requiring skill and coordination (e.g., writing,
drawing, cutting) is defined as right-handed. Roughly
90% of humans are right-handed. Because left-handed
people who are forced to write with their right hand
sometimes develop the ability to write with both hands,
the term ambidexterity is often used in everyday parlance to denote balanced handedness.
An often misunderstood phenomenon, handedness is
a result of the human brain’s unique development. While
the human mind is intuitively understood as a single entity, research in brain physiology and anatomy has demonstrated that various areas of the brain control different
mental aptitudes, and that the physiological structure of
the brain affects our mental functions. The brain’s fundamental structure is dual (there are two cerebral hemispheres), and this duality is an essential quality of the
human body. Generally speaking, each hemisphere is
connected to sensory receptors on the opposite side of the
body. In other words, the right hand is controlled by the
left hemisphere of the cerebral cortex. When scientists
started studying the brain’s anatomy, they learned that the
two hemispheres are not identical. In fact, the French
physician and anthropologist Pierre Broca (1824-1880)
and the German neurologist and psychiatrist Carl

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

293

Handedness

How LSD and other hallucinogens produce these
bizarre effects remains unknown. The drug attaches to
certain chemical binding sites widely spread through the
brain, but what ensues thereafter has yet to be described.
A person who takes LSD steadily with the doses close
together can develop a tolerance to the drug. That is, the
amount of drug that once produced a pronounced “high”
no longer is effective. A larger dose is required to
achieve the same effect. However, if the individual keeps
increasing his drug intake he will soon pass over the
threshold into the area of toxicity.

Hand-eye coordination

Wernicke (1848-1905) produced empirical evidence that
important language centers were located in the left hemisphere. Since Broca’s findings were based on right-handed subjects, and since right-handedness is predominant in
humans, psychologists felt prompted to develop the notion of the left hemisphere as the dominant part of the
brain. Furthermore, Broca formulated a general rule stating that the language hemisphere is always opposite of a
person’s preferred side. In other words, the left hemisphere always controls a right-handed person’s language
abilities. According to Broca rule’s, left-handedness
would indicate a hemispheric switch. Handedness research, however, uncovered a far more complex situation.
While Broca’s rule works for right-handers, left-handed
people present a rather puzzling picture. Namely, researchers have discovered that only about two out of 10
left-handers follow Broca’s rule. In other words, most
left-handed people violate Broca’s rule by having their
language center in the left hemisphere. Furthermore, the
idea of clearly defined cerebral dominance seems compromised by the fact that some 70% of left-handed people
have bilateral hemispheric control of language.
While hemispheric dominance can be observed in
animals, only humans have a clearly defined type of
dominance. In other words, while animals may be right
or left “pawed,” only humans are predominantly righthanded. The American developmental psychologist
Arnold Gesell (1880-1961), known for his pioneering
work in scientific observation of child behavior, noted
that as early as the age of four weeks infants display
signs of handedness. At that age, according to Gesell,
right-handed children assume a “fencing” position, right
arm and hand extended; by the age of one, right-handedness is clearly established, the child using the right hand
for a variety of operations, and the left for holding and
gripping. Predominant right-handedness in humans has
led researchers to define right-handedness as genetically
coded. If left-handedness also had a genetic basis, was it
possible to establish inheritance patterns? However, empirical studies, even studies of identical twins, have
failed to establish left-handedness as a genetic trait. For
example, a person with two left-handed parents has only
a 35% chance of being left-handed.
In the past, left-handedness was associated with
mental deficiency, as well as emotional and behavioral
problems, which led to the popular belief, strengthened
by folklore, that left-handed people were somehow
flawed. In addition, left-handedness has also been associated with immunological problems and a shorter life
span. While not devoid of any foundation, these ideas are
based on inconclusive, and sometimes even deceptive,
evidence. For example, statistics may indicate a shorter
life-span for left-handers, but what statistics omit is the
294

fact that higher mortality should probably be attributed
to accidents in an often dangerous right-hand world.
An even greater challenge than right-handed scissors and can openers is what psychologist Stanley Coren
calls “handism,” the belief that right-handedness is “better” than left-handedness. The idea that left-handers need
to conform to a dominant standard has traditionally been
translated into punitive educational practices whereby
left-handed children were physically forced to write with
their right hand. While there is a growing awareness
among educators and parents that left-handedness should
not be suppressed, the left-handed child is still exposed
to a variety of pressures, some subtle, some crude, to
conform. These pressures are reinforced by a tradition of
maligning left-handed people. Major religious traditions,
such as Christianity, Buddhism, and Islam, have described left-handedness in negative terms. Current language is also a rich repository of recorded animosity toward left-handers. For example, the word left evolved
from the Anglo-Saxon lyft, which means weak. The
Latin word sinister, meaning left and unfavorable, is still
used to denote something evil, and gauche, the French
word for left, generally indicates awkwardness. The numerous expressions which imply that left is the opposite
of good include a left-handed compliment.
Zoran Minderovic
Further Reading
Coren, Stanley. The Left-Hander Syndrome: The Causes and
Consequences of Left-Handedness. New York: Vintage
Books, 1993.
Temple, Christine. The Brain. London: Penguin Books, 1993.

Hand-eye coordination
The ability to coordinate vision with fine motor
skills.

Hand-eye coordination begins developing in infancy. Although it is an instinctive developmental achievement that cannot be taught, parents can hasten its
progress by providing their children with stimulating
toys and other objects that will encourage them to practice reaching out for things and grasping them.
Until the age of eight weeks, infants are too nearsighted to see objects at distances farther than about
eight inches from their faces, and they have not yet discovered their hands, which are kept fisted throughout
this period. By the age of two to two-and-a-half months,
the eyes focus much better, and babies can follow a mov-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Hand-eye coordination

Sports like volleyball help improve hand-eye coordination. (Photo by Robert J. Huffman. Field Mark Publications. Reproduced
with permission.)

ing object with their gaze, even turning their heads to
keep sight of it longer. However, when a child this age
drops an object, she will try to find it by feeling rather
than looking for it, and although she plays with her
hands, she does it without looking at them.
By three months, most infants will have made an important hand-eye connection; they can deliberately bring
their hands into their field of vision. By now they are
watching their hands when they play with them. They also
swipe at objects within their view, a repetitive activity that
provides practice in estimating distance and controlling
the hands. Attempts to grab onto things (which usually
fail) consist of a series of tries, with the child looking at
the object and then at his hand, moving his hand closer to
it, and then re-sighting the object and trying again.
At the age of four or five months, hand-eye coordination is developed sufficiently for an infant to manipulate toys, and she will begin to seek them out. By the age
of six months, she can focus on objects at a distance and
consistently follow them with her eyes. At this point, the
infant can sight an object and reach for it without repeatedly looking at her hand. She senses where her hand is
and can lead it straight to the object, keeping her eyes on

the object the entire time. By the final months of her first
year, an infant can shift her gaze between objects held in
both hands and compare them to each other.

Toddlerhood
The toddler stage brings further progress in handeye coordination, resulting in the control necessary to
manipulate objects with increasing sophistication. The
ability to sight and grasp objects accurately improves
dramatically with the acquisition of the “pincer grasp.”
This ability to grasp objects between the thumb and forefinger develops between the ages of 12 and 15 months.
Around the same time, children begin stacking objects
on top of each other. Most can stack two blocks by the
age of 15 months and three by the age of 18 months. At
this age they also begin emptying, gathering, and nesting
objects, or placing one inside another. Toddlers can also
draw horizontal and vertical pencil lines and circular
scribbles, twist dials, push levers, pull strings, pound
pegs, string large beads, put a key in a lock, and turn
book pages. Eventually, they are able to stack as many as
six blocks, unwrap small objects, manipulate snap toys,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

295

Harry F. Harlow

and play with clay. Between the ages of 15 and 23
months there is significant improvement in feeding
skills, such as using a spoon and a cup.

Preschool years
During the preschool period, hand-eye coordination
progresses to the point of near independence at self-care
activities. A four-year-old is learning to handle eating
utensils well and button even small buttons. Four-yearolds can also handle a pencil competently, copy geometric shapes and letters, and use scissors. By the age of
five, a child’s hand-eye coordination appears quite advanced, although it will still continue to be fine-tuned for
several more years. He approaches, grasps, and releases
objects with precision and accuracy. He may use the
same toys as preschoolers, but he manipulates them with
greater skill and purpose and can complete a familiar jigsaw puzzles with lightning speed. An important milestone in hand-eye progress at this stage is the child’s
ability to tie his own shoelaces. At the age of six, a
child’s visual orientation changes somewhat. Children of
this age and older shift their gaze more frequently than
younger children. They also have a tendency to follow
the progress of an object rather than looking directly at
it, a fact that has been linked to the practice of some sixyear-olds using their fingers to mark their places when
they are reading. Even when absorbed in tasks, they look
away frequently, although their hands remain active.

School-aged children
Hand-eye coordination improves through middle
childhood, with advances in speed, timing, and coordination. By the age of nine, the eyes and hands are well differentiated, that is, each can be used independently of the
other, and improved finger differentiation is evident as
well. Nine-year-olds can use carpentry and garden tools
with reasonable skill and complete simple sewing projects.
See also Fine motor skills
Further Reading
Eckert, Helen M. Motor Development. 3rd ed. Indianapolis,
IN: Benchmark Press, 1987.
Lerch, Harold A., and Christine B. Stopka. Developmental
Motor Activities for All Children: From Theory to Practice. Dubuque, IA: Brown and Benchmark, 1992.

Harry F. Harlow
1905-1981
American psychologist whose major contributions
to psychology arose from his work with rhesus
monkeys.
296

Experimental and comparative psychologist Harry
Harlow is best known for his work on the importance of
maternal contact in the growth and social development
of infants. Working with infant monkeys and surrogate
mothers made of terrycloth or wire, Harlow concluded
that extended social deprivation in the early years of life
can severely disrupt later social and sexual behavior.
Harlow also conducted important studies involving the
behavior of prisoners of war during the Korean War, as
well as work concerning problem-solving and learning
among primates.
Harlow was born in 1905 in Fairfield, Iowa. Following his education at Stanford, where he earned his bachelor’s degree and a Ph.D. in 1930, he began a long academic career at the University of Wisconsin. His teaching
career spanned 44 years, beginning in 1930. He also
served as director of the university’s Regional Primate
Center from 1961-71. In his work with primates, Harlow
developed what he called a “uniprocess learning theory,”
which describes how primates learn through a succession
of incorrect responses to stimuli.
When Harry Harlow began his famous studies of attachment behaviors in rhesus monkeys, he was able to
pit two competing theories of the development of affiliative behaviors against each other. Drive-reduction approaches were based on the premise that bonds between
mothers and children were nurtured by the fact that
mothers provided food and warmth to meet the infant’s
biological needs. Attachment theorists, on the other
hand, felt that the provision of security through contact
and proximity were the driving factors in the development of attachment.
Harlow devised a series of ingenious studies in
which infant rhesus monkeys were raised in cages
without their natural mothers, but with two surrogate
objects instead. One surrogate “mother” was a wire
form that the monkey could approach to receive food.
Another form offered no food, but was wrapped in
terry cloth so the infant could cling to a softer and
more cuddly surface. What happened when a large,
threatening mechanical spider was introduced into the
cage? The infant monkeys ran to the terry cloth surrogates, demonstrating that contact comfort was more
important than just meeting basic hunger needs for the
establishment of a relationship from which the infant
might derive security.
In a series of related experiments, Harlow studied
the effects of maternal and contact comfort deprivation
across the monkey’s lifespan, uncovering unexpectedly
harmful effects of such deprivation on the monkeys’ own
childrearing abilities at maturity. Later, Harlow’s student, Stephen Suomi, and his colleagues demonstrated

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

nostic, and prescription processes, provider-patient interaction, and the training of health care personnel.

Harlow’s conclusions about maternal bonding and
deprivation, based on his work with monkeys and first
presented in the early 1960s, later became controversial,
but are still considered important developments in the
area of child psychology.
Harlow served for many years as editor of the Journal
of Comparative and Physiological Psychology. In 1960, he
received the Distinguished Scientific Contributions Award
from the American Psychological Association, and in
1967, he was awarded the National Medal of Science.
Doreen Arcus, Ph.D.
Further Reading
Harlow, Harry. Learning to Love. New York: Aronson, 1974.

Health psychology
A subfield of psychology devoted to health maintenance, including research on the relationship between mental and physical health, guidance in improving individual health through lifestyle changes,
and analysis and improvement of the health care
system.

Health psychology is a diverse area with a variety of
emphases. Medical psychology focuses on the clinical
treatment of patients with physical illnesses, offering
practical advice people can use in order to improve their
health. While there is special emphasis on psychosomatic disorders—those that have traditionally been most
closely related to psychological factors—the current
trend is toward a holistic perspective that considers all
physical health inseparable from a patient’s emotional
state. As part of this trend, psychologists and pediatricians have joined forces in the growing area of pediatric
psychology, collaborating to meet the health and developmental needs of children and their families. Another
focal point is rehabilitation psychology, which teams
mental health professionals with health care providers
who care for patients with physical disabilities and
chronic conditions, often in institutional settings.
Another province of health psychology is the study of
“health behavior”—how people take care of or neglect
their health, either in a preventative context or when they
are ill. This area includes such concerns as drug abuse, utilization of health care resources, and adjustment to chronic illness. Health psychology also addresses the health
care system itself, including analysis of the outreach, diag-

See also Applied psychology

Hearing
The ability to perceive sound.

The ear, the receptive organ for hearing, has three
major parts: the outer, middle, and inner ear. The pinna or
outer ear—the part of the ear attached to the head, funnels sound waves through the outer ear. The sound waves
pass down the auditory canal to the middle ear, where
they strike the tympanic membrane, or eardrum, causing
it to vibrate. These vibrations are picked up by three
small bones (ossicles) in the middle ear named for their
shapes: the malleus (hammer), incus (anvil), and stapes
(stirrup). The stirrup is attached to a thin membrane
called the oval window, which is much smaller than the
eardrum and consequently receives more pressure.
As the oval window vibrates from the increased
pressure, the fluid in the coiled, tubular cochlea (inner
ear) begins to vibrate the membrane of the cochlea (basilar membrane) which, in turn, bends fine, hairlike cells
on its surface. These auditory receptors generate miniature electrical forces which trigger nerve impulses that
then travel via the auditory nerve, first to the thalamus
and then to the primary auditory cortex in the temporal
lobe of the brain. Here, transformed into auditory but
meaningless sensations, the impulses are relayed to association areas of the brain which convert them into meaningful sounds by examining the activity patterns of the
neurons, or nerve cells, to determine sound frequencies.
Although the ear changes sound waves into neural impulses, it is the brain that actually “hears,” or perceives
the sound as meaningful.
The auditory system contains about 25,000 cochlear
neurons that can process a wide range of sounds. The
sounds we hear are determined by two characteristics of
sound waves: their amplitude (the difference in air pressure between the peak and baseline of a wave) and their
frequency (the number of waves that pass by a given
point every second). Loudness of sound is influenced by
a complex relationship between the wavelength and amplitude of the wave; the greater the amplitude, the faster
the neurons fire impulses to the brain, and the louder the
sound that is heard. Loudness of sound is usually expressed in decibels (dB). A whisper is about 30 dB, normal conversation is about 60 dB, and a subway train is
about 90 dB. Sounds above 120 dB are generally painful

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

297

Hearing

that these longstanding effects could be improved by introducing a nurturant “foster grandmother.”

Donald O. Hebb

DECIBEL RATINGS AND HAZARDOUS LEVEL OF NOISE
Decibel level

Example of sounds

30

Soft whisper

35

Noise may prevent the listener from falling asleep

40

Quiet office noise level

50

Quiet conversation

60

Average television, sewing machine, lively conversation

70

Busy traffic, noisy restaurant

80

Heavy city traffic, factory noise, alarm clock

90

Cocktail party, lawn mower

100

Pneumatic drill

120

Sandblasting, thunder

140

Jet airplane

180

Rocket launching pad

Above 110 decibels, hearing may become painful.
Above 120 decibels is considered deafening.
Above 135, hearing will become extremely painful and hearing loss may result if exposure is prolonged.
Above 180, hearing loss is almost certain with any exposure.

to the human ear. The loudest rock band on record was
measured at 160 dB.
Pitch (how high or low a tone sounds) is a function
of frequency. Sounds with high frequencies are heard as
having a high pitch; those with low frequencies are heard
as low-pitched. The normal frequency range of human
hearing is 20 to 20,000 Hz. Frequencies of some commonly heard sounds include the human voice (120 to approximately 1,100 Hz), middle C on the piano (256 Hz),
and the highest note on the piano (4,100 Hz). Differences in frequency are discerned, or coded, by the
human ear in two ways, frequency matching and place.
The lowest sound frequencies are coded by frequency
matching, duplicating the frequency with the firing rate
of auditory nerve fibers. Frequencies in the low to moderate range are coded both by frequency matching and
by the place on the basilar membrane where the sound
wave peaks. High frequencies are coded solely by the
placement of the wave peak
Loss of hearing can result from conductive or sensorineural deafness or damage to auditory areas of the
brain. In conductive hearing loss, the sound waves are unable to reach the inner ear due to disease or obstruction of
the auditory conductive system (the external auditory
canal; the eardrum, or tympanic membrane; or structures
and spaces in the middle ear). Sensorineural hearing loss
refers to two different but related types of impairment,
298

both affecting the inner ear. Sensory hearing loss involves
damage, degeneration, or developmental failure of the hair
cells in the cochlea’s organ of Corti, while neural loss involves the auditory nerve or other parts of the cochlea.
Sensorineural hearing loss occurs as a result of disease,
birth defects, aging, or continual exposure to loud
sounds. Damage to the auditory areas of the brain through
severe head injury, tumors, or strokes can also prevent either the perception or the interpretation of sound.
Further Reading
Davis, Lennard J. Enforcing Normalcy: Disability, Deafness,
and the Body. New York: Verso, 1995.

Donald O. Hebb
1904-1985
Canadian psychologist who studied the effects of
brain development on intelligence.

The difference between the way a young brain and
an older brain processes information was the focus of
Donald Hebb’s research during a career that spanned
nearly half a century. Hebb was fascinated by the way
people learned and the way they retained information.
His research opened many doors in the field of behav-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Donald Olding Hebb was born in Cheser, Nova Scotia, on July 22, 1904. Both his parents were physicians, but
science was not Hebb’s initial interest. As a youth he wanted to become a novelist; he had given up this desire by the
time he received his bachelor’s degree from Dalhousie
University in 1925. He spent the next few years pursuing
several occupations including teaching and farming. He finally decided to enter a master’s program at McGill University, focusing on psychology. He graduated in 1932 and
went to the University of Chicago to study under Professor
Karl S. Lashley. When Lashley relocated to Harvard, Hebb
followed. He received his doctorate in 1936.
In 1937, Hebb was appointed a research fellow at the
Montreal Neurological Institute, where he became involved in studies of the brain. His particular interest was,
in simplest terms, the concept of “nature versus nurture.”
Hebb wanted to find out how much of a role the brain
played in behavior. Research had shown that adults could
often function quite well even after a significant part of
the brain had been damaged; similar damage in infants,
however, produced retardation. Hebb reasoned that, for
adults, external stimulation might play a more prominent
role in how the brain functioned. Over the next several
years, first at Montreal, then at Queen’s University, and
then at the Yerkes Primate Labs, Hebb conducted experiments on animals and humans. His research showed that
lack of external stimulation resulted in diminished ability
to solve problems and to concentrate. Some subjects even
reported hallucinations. In practical application, Hebb’s
research explained in part why airline pilots and long-distance truck drivers sometimes hallucinated.
In 1947 Hebb became professor of psychology at
McGill, where he remained until he retired in 1972. He became an emeritus professor four years later. Hebb was a
long-time member of both the Canadian and the American
Psychological Assocations. He was the first non-U.S. citizen to serve as APA president (1960). He won the APA
Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award in 1961. The
Donald O. Hebb. Award, of which he was the first recipient
in 1980, honors Canadians who have made a lasting contribution to the sciences. Hebb died in Nova Scotia in 1985.
See also Cognitive development; Nature-nuture controversy
George A. Milite
Further Reading
McGraw-Hill modern scientists and engineers. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980.
Restak, Richard M. The mind. New York: Bantam, 1988.

Fritz Heider
1896-1988
Austrian-American psychologist who developed
concept of attribution theory.

How we interpret our own behavior, as well as that
of others, formed the basis for Fritz Heider’s work during a career that lasted more than 60 years. Heider explored the nature of interpersonal relations, and his work
culminated in the 1958 book The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations. Heider espoused the concept of what
he called “common-sense” or “naïve” psychology. He
believed that people attribute the behavior of others to
their own perceptions; and that those perceptions could
be determined either by specific situations or by longheld beliefs. The concept may not seem complicated, but
it opened important doors to the question of how people
relate to each other and why.
Heider, the younger of two sons, was born in Vienna
on February 18, 1896, to Moriz and Eugenie von Halaczy Heider. He was an avid reader and a good student,
and he entered the University of Graz (Austria). He received his Ph.D. in 1920, and spent the next several
years traveling through Europe. Part of this time was
spent as a student at the Psychological Institute of
Berlin. Pre-World War II Berlin was one of the most intellectually stimulating cities in Europe, and he was privileged to study with outstanding scholars.

Begins research on interpersonal behavior
In 1930, Heider accepted an offer to conduct research at the Clarke School for the Deaf in Northampton,
Massachutsetts, and to be an assistant professor at Smith
College. Heider’s decision to come to the United States
proved auspicious for two reasons. In addition to the
work he was to do—first at Smith, and later at the University of Kansas—Heider met Grace Moore, who was
doing research of her own at Clarke. They married in
December 1930; in his autobiography, The Life of a Psychologist (1983), Heider credits his wife for her invaluable contribution to his work. The Heiders had three sons
during their years in Northampton.
Beginning at Smith, Heider began to do the research
that led to his theories on interpersonal relations. He
continued his work when he moved to Lawrence,
Kansas, in 1947 to take a professorship at the University
of Kansas. It has been said that Heider approached psychology the way a physicist would approach scientific
theory. He was extremely methodical and meticulous in
his research, which could often be frustrating, but he

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

299

Fritz Heider

ioral science and made him one of the most influential
behaviorists in twentieth-century psychology.

Hermann von Helmholtz

carefully developed the ideas that he ultimately outlined
in The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations.
In its simplest terms, attribution theory explains
the means people use to attribute the behavior of others.
Sometimes, behavior is attributed to disposition; in other
words, we might decide that altruism is what makes a
particular person donate money to a charity. Other times,
behavior can be attributed to situations; in this model,
the donor gives money to charity because of social pressure. Heider believed that people generally tended to
give more attribution than they should to personality,
and, conversely, less than they should to situations. In
other words, personality is not as consistent an indicator
of behavior as people tend to believe.

Allows publication of notebooks
Heider received numerous awards for his research,
including the American Psychological Association’s
Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award in 1965. Although Heider ostensibly retired in the 1960s, he continued to do research as an emeritus professor. He worked
on his memoirs, which became his autobiography. More
important, however, were series of notebooks Heider had
kept during his career, in which he explained and diagramed many of his theories, listed references, and discussed many of the questions he had tried to answer
through his research. A former student of Heider’s, Marijana Benesh-Weiner, offered to edit and compile the
notes. Working with Heider, she put the notes into a sixvolume set published by Springer-Verlag under the title,
Fritz Heider: The Notebooks. The first volume was published in 1987; Benesh-Weiner completed editing the
final volume shortly after Heider, aged 91, died at his
home in Lawrence, Kansas, on January 2, 1988.
See also Attribution theory
George A. Milite
Further Reading
Harvey, John H. “Fritz Heider.” American Psychologist,
(March 1989): 570-571.
Heider, Fritz. The Life of a Psychologist: An Autobiography.
Lawrence, KS, University of Kansas Press, 1983.

Hermann von Helmholtz
1821-1894
German scientist who conducted breakthrough research on the nervous system.
300

Hermann Helmholtz was one of the few scientists to
master two disciplines: medicine and physics. He conducted breakthrough research on the nervous system, as
well as the functions of the eye and ear. In physics, he is
recognized (along with two other scientists) as the author
of the concept of conservation of energy.
Helmholtz was born into a poor but scholarly family; his father was an instructor of philosophy and literature at a gymnasium in his hometown of Potsdam, Germany. At home, his father taught him Latin, Greek,
French, Italian, Hebrew, and Arabic, as well as the philosophical ideas of Immanuel Kant and J. G. Fichte (who
was a friend of the family). With this background,
Helmholtz entered school with a wide scope of knowledge. Though he expressed an interest in the sciences,
his father could not afford to send him to a university; instead, he was persuaded to study medicine, an area that
would provide him with government aid. In return,
Helmholtz was expected to use his medical skills for the
good of the government—particularly in army hospitals.
Helmholtz entered the Friedrich Wilhelm Institute in
Berlin in 1898, receiving his M.D. four years later. Upon
graduation he was immediately assigned to military duty,
practicing as a surgeon for the Prussian army. After several years of active duty he was discharged, free to pursue a career in academia. In 1848 he secured a position
as lecturer at the Berlin Academy of Arts. Just a year
later he was offered a professorship at the University of
Konigsberg, teaching physiology. Over the next 22 years
he moved to the universities at Bonn and Heidelberg, and
it was during this time that he conducted his major works
in the field of medicine.
Helmholtz began to study the human eye, a task that
was all the more difficult for the lack of precise medical
equipment. In order to better understand the function of
the eye he invented the ophthalmoscope, a device used to
observe the retina. Invented in 1851, the ophthalmoscope—in a slightly modified form—is still used by
modern eye specialists. Helmholtz also designed a device used to measure the curvature of the eye called an
ophthalmometer. Using these devices he advanced the
theory of three-color vision first proposed by Thomas
Young. This theory, now called the Young-Helmholtz
theory, helps ophthalmologists to understand the nature
of color blindness and other afflictions.
Intrigued by the inner workings of the sense organs,
Helmholtz went on to study the human ear. Being an expert pianist, he was particularly concerned with the way
the ear distinguished pitch and tone. He suggested that
the inner ear is structured in such a way as to cause resonations at certain frequencies. This allowed the ear to
discern similar tones, overtones, and timbres, such as an
identical note played by two different instruments.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Helmholtz had been a sickly child; even throughout
his adult life he was plagued by migraine headaches and
dizzy spells. In 1894, shortly after a lecture tour of the
United States, he fainted and fell, suffering a concussion.
He never completely recovered, dying of complications
several months later.

Heredity
The process by which the genetic code of parents
is passed on to their children.

Hermann von Helmhotz (The Library of Congress.
Reproduced by permission.)

In 1852 Helmholtz conducted what was probably
his most important work as a physician: the measurement of the speed of a nerve impulse. It had been assumed that such a measurement could never be obtained
by science, since the speed was far too great for instruments to catch. Some physicians even used this as proof
that living organisms were powered by an innate “vital
force” rather than energy. Helmholtz disproved this by
stimulating a frog’s nerve first near a muscle and then
farther away; when the stimulus was farther from the
muscle, it contracted just a little slower. After a few simple calculations Helmholtz announced the impulse velocity within the nervous system to be about one-tenth
the speed of sound.
After completing much of the work on sensory physiology that had interested him, Helmholtz found himself
bored with medicine. In 1868 he decided to return to his
first love—physical science. However, it was not until
1870 that he was offered the physics chair at the University of Berlin and only after it had been turned down by
Gustav Kirchhoff. By that time, Helmholtz had already
completed his groundbreaking research on energetics.
The concept of conservation of energy was introduced by Julius Mayer in 1842, but Helmholtz was un-

There are certain traits that parents pass on to their
children, including eye color, hair color, height, and
other physical characteristics. The coding for these traits
are contained inside DNA molecules that are present
within all human cells. Since the discovery of DNA by
James Watson (1928- ) in the 1950s, the science of genetics has focused on the study of DNA and the ways in
which physical traits are passed on from generation to
generation. Within genetics, a special branch of DNA
science—called quantitative, or biometrical, genetics—
has emerged, which studies the heritability of such traits
as intelligence, behavior, and personality. This branch
focuses on the effects of polygenes in the creation of certain phenotypes. Polygenes, as the name implies, refer to
the interaction of several genes; and phenotypes are certain variable characteristics of behavior or personality.
Quantitative geneticists, therefore, study the effects of
groups of genes on the development of personality and
other abstract variables. They rarely, it should be noted,
are able to pinpoint a behavior’s genesis to a specific
gene. Specific genes have been found to cause a small
number of diseases, however, such as Huntington’s disease and other degenerative disorders.
In studying personality traits and intelligence, the
latest research in quantitative genetics suggests that the
heritability rate for many characteristics hovers around
50 percent. In 1988 a study of twins reared apart re-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

301

Heredity

aware of Mayer’s work. Helmholtz conducted his own
research on energy, basing his theories upon his previous
experience with muscles. It could be observed that animal heat was generated by muscle action, as well as
chemical reactions within a working muscle. Helmholtz
believed that this energy was derived from food and that
food got its energy from the Sun. He proposed that energy could not be created spontaneously, nor could it vanish—it was either used or released as heat. This explanation was much clearer and more detailed than the one offered by Mayer, and Helmholtz is often considered the
true originator of the concept of conservation of energy.

Heterosexuality

vealed the heritability of 11 common character traits.
The findings, published in the Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, reported that social potency is 61%
influenced by genes; traditionalism, 60%; stress reaction, 55%; absorption (having a vivid imagination),
55%; alienation, 55%; well-being, 54%; harm avoidance (avoiding dangerous activities), 51%; aggression,
48%; achievement, 46%; control, 43%; and social closeness, 33 percent.

cultures that have had no exposure to media. It used to
be thought that the human smile was learned through observation and imitation, but a 1975 study found that
children who had been blind from birth began smiling at
the same age as sighted children. Many of these behaviors are thought to be instinctual. Aside from the
infant/developmental behaviors already mentioned, other
inherited behavior patterns in humans include sex, aggression, fear, and curiosity/exploration.

Other recent studies have compiled lists of traits
most influenced by heredity. Physical characteristics that
are most genetically determined include height, weight,
tone of voice, tooth decay, athletic ability, and age of
death, among others. Intellectual capabilities include
memory, IQ scores, age of language acquisition, reading
disabilities, and mental retardation. Emotional characteristics found to be most influenced by heredity were
shyness, extroversion, neuroses, schizophrenia, anxiety, and alcohol dependence. It is important to note that
these are tendencies and not absolutes. Many children of
alcoholics, for instance, do not become alcoholics themselves. Many social and cultural factors intervene as humans develop, and the child of an alcoholic, who may be
genetically vulnerable to acquiring the disease, may
avoid drinking from witnessing the devastation caused
by the disease. (For a fuller discussion of the role of environment, see Nature-Nurture Controversy.)

Further Reading

Recent work has shown that genes can both be influenced by the environment and can even influence the environments in which we find ourselves. A 1990 study found
that animals raised in environments requiring significant
motor activity actually developed new structures in the
brain that were significantly different from the brain structures of animals raised in environments lacking motor
stimuli. Observations from such experiments have revealed
that complex environments actually “turn on” sets of genes
that control other genes, whose job it is to build new cerebral structures. Therefore, living in an environment that
provides challenges can genetically alter a person’s makeup. Additionally, a genetic predisposition to introversion
can cause people to isolate themselves, thus changing their
environment and, in the process, altering their development
of social skills. This, then, contributes further to their genetic predisposition to introversion.

The sex drive, or sexual desire, is an unlearned,
powerful drive that humans share with other animal
species. Heterosexuals experience sexual desire in relation to members of the opposite sex. This contrasts with
homosexuals, where the object of sexual desire is a
member of one’s own sex. Most researchers believe that
children begin to notice physical differences between
males and females by about age two. As children grow,
they learn about sex roles and sex differences by observing their parents and other adults, including teachers,
child care providers, and from play experiences and the
attitudes and behavior of peers. Gender identity becomes firmly established, that is, the young boy understands that he is a boy, and thinks of himself as a boy.

There also appears to be universal, inherited behavior patterns in humans. Common behaviors across diverse cultures include the patterns of protest among infants and small children at being separated from their
mothers. A study conducted in 1976 found that separation protests emerge, peak, and then disappear in nearly
identical ways across five widely diverse cultures. Other
studies have found universal facial expressions for common emotions, even among pre-literate hunter-gatherer
302

Beal, Eileen. “Charting the Future? Researching Heredity
Quotient in African American Families.” American Visions (October-November 1994): 44.
Berkowitz, Ari. “Our Genes, Ourselves?” BioScience (January
1996): 42.
Metzler, Kristan. “The Apple Doesn’t Fall Far in Families
Linked to Crime.” Insight on the News (29 August 1994):
17.
Tellegen, A. “Personality Similarity in Twins Reared Apart and
Together.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
54 (1988): 1031.

Heterosexuality
Sexual attraction to members of the opposite sex.

Sex researcher Alfred Kinsey (1894-1956), who
founded the Institute for Sex Research at Indiana University in 1942, believed that sexual orientation in humans
is complex, ranging from exclusively homosexual to exclusively heterosexual, with most people’s sexual desires
falling somewhere between the two. In fact, some individuals practice bisexuality, that is, they engage in sexual relations with both members of their own sex and
members of the opposite sex. Kinsey’s controversial
study, popularly known as the “Kinsey Report,” was
published in 1948 under the title Sexual Behavior in the
Human Male. His theory caused heated public discus-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Although much research into underlying causes of
sexual orientation has been done, little conclusion evidence has emerged about why one individual is heterosexual and another homosexual. Researchers have studied biological and genetic determinants, hormone levels,
and environmental factors. It seems from evidence available in the mid-1990s that environmental and biological
factors combine in the complex process of human development to establish sexual orientation.
See also Sexuality
Further Reading
Fisher, Seymour. Sexual Images of the Self: the Psychology of
Erotic Sensations and Illusions. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum
Associates, 1989.
Levand, Rhonda. Sexual Evolution. Berkeley, CA: Celestial
Arts, 1991.

Ernest Hilgard distinguished himself through his
studies of the role of hypnosis in human behavior and response. Hypnotism, often regarded as nothing more than
a stage trick by pseudo-psychics, is in fact an important
psychological tool; it can be used to alter behavior
(smoking cessation, for example), and to relieve pain.
Much of Hilgard’s research and writing on the topic was
done with his wife, Josephine R. Hilgard (1906-1989).
Born in Belleville, Illinois, on July 25, 1904, Ernest
Ropiequit Hilgard was the son of a physician, and he
showed an early interest in science. Interestingly, it was
engineering, not psychology, that originally attracted Hilgard; he received a bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering from the University of Illinois in 1924. He decided that he wanted to study psychology, and he went to
Yale, where he was awarded his Ph.D. in 1930. His initial
area of interest was conditioned responses. He did extensive research with the human eye lid; as part of this research he developed a photographic technique for examining the responses. His work demonstrated the relation between voluntary and involuntary responses, and won him
the Warren Medal in Experimental Psychology in 1940.

Begins work on hypnosis

Heuristics
A methodical procedure for discovering solutions
to problems.

The principal feature of heuristics is the formulation
of a hypothetical solution to a problem at the beginning
of an investigation of the problem. This working hypothesis serves to direct the course of the investigation, and is
modified and refined as relevant facts are discovered and
analyzed. During the course of the investigation, the
heuristic method reduces the range, and increases the
plausibility, of possible solutions of the problem. Unlike
an algorithm, however, which is a methodical procedure
that necessarily produces the solution of a problem,
heuristics does not necessarily lead to the solution of a
problem. Heuristics has been fundamental in the acquisition of scientific knowledge, and, in fact, is an essential
component of many forms of complex human behavior.

Ernest R. Hilgard
1904American psychologist who conducted pioneering
work in hypnotism.

Later, Hilgard became intrigued by the mechanism
behind hypnosis. In part, this was not an unusual move:
his work on voluntary and involuntary responses focused
on the control factor, as does hypnosis. The popular
stereotype of hypnosis, in which a person falls into a
trance-like state after staring at a moving watch and then
involuntarily being made to bark like a dog, is hardly all
there is to the process. Nor is hypnotism some mystical
power that channels evil forces. It is true that, under certain hypnotic conditions, patients can be given suggestions that they will follow—moving a limb, for example,
or holding it rigid. But to treat hypnotism as nothing
more than showmanship misses the point. Hypnosis is a
tool that, used under the right circumstances, can be useful and even beneficial.
Hilgard, working with his wife and other colleagues,
began experimenting and collecting data on hypnosis as a
means of, among other things, treating pain. One of the
interesting aspects of Hilgard’s research into hypnosis is
the concept of what he calls the “hidden observer.” Ostensibly, a person undergoing hypnosis to manage pain, for
example, feels no conscious pain. That does not mean the
pain is not there, however; nor does it mean that the patient’s subconscious is not registering the pain. In one experiment conducted by the Hilgards, subjects were hypnotized and told they would feel no pain or discomfort
when an arm was placed in ice water, or when a tourniquet was tied at the elbow to restrict blood flow to the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

303

Ernest R. Hilgard

sion, since sexual behavior was considered a taboo subject for public discussion and study. In fact, until the late
1960s, any sexual behavior outside of exclusively heterosexual was considered either a mental illness or perversion. Although homosexuality continues to be prohibited by law in many locales, it is no longer listed as a mental disorder by the American Psychiatric Association.

Robert Aubrey Hinde

arm. The subjects reported no pain or discomfort during
these procedures. When their “hidden observers” were
tapped into, however (usually by a prearranged sign or
suggestion from the experimenter), there were reports of
pain and discomfort (although not necessarily as severe
as would be expected). In subjects particularly susceptible to hypnotic suggestion—those who could be rendered
hypnotically deaf or blind, for example—the “hidden observer” could recall “heard” or “seen” objects.

Wins praise for writings
In addition to his important work as a researcher,
Hilgard was also a noted author. He wrote a number of
books and papers on the specific areas he studied, and
his authorship was distinguished by an ability to make
complex issues understandable. This was evident not
only in his first book (written with Donald G. Marquis in
1940), Conditioning and Learning, but throughout his
distinguished career, perhaps most notably in his textbooks for introductory psychology courses such as Introduction to Psychology (first edition 1953) with Rita and
Richard Atkinson.
After teaching at Yale for three years, Hilgard accepted a position at Stanford in 1933 . He headed the
psychology department at Stanford from 1942 to 1951
and served as dean of the graduate division from 1951 to
1955. He became a professor emeritus in 1969 but continued on as head of the laboratory of Hypnosis Research. Among Hilgard’s awards over the years are the
American Psychological Association’s Distinguished
Scientific Contribution Award (1969) and the American
Psychological Foundation’s Gold Career Award (1978).
His memberships include the National Academy of Sciences, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and
the National Academy of Education.
George A. Milite
Further Reading
Bower, Gordon H. and Ernest R. Hilgard. Theories of Learning, 5th ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice-Hall, 1981.
Hilgard, Ernest R. and Josephine R. Hilgard. Hypnosis in the
Relief of Pain. Los Altos, CA: W. Kaufmann, 1983.
McGraw-Hill Modern Scientists and Engineers. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1980.

Robert Aubrey Hinde
1923British biologist, ethologist, psychologist, and author who has played an important role in integrating ethology with other fields.
304

Robert Aubrey Hinde has played an important role
in integrating ethology (the scientific study of typical
behavior patterns in animals) with other fields, such as
psychology. He was born in 1923 in Norwich, England.
The youngest of four children, Hinde’s father, Ernest
Bertram, was a doctor, and his mother Isabella (maiden
name Taylor) was a nurse. He got much of his early education at an English boarding school called Oundle that
emphasized natural history.
After serving as a pilot in the Royal Air Force during World War II, he entered St. John’s College at Cambridge, where he received his bachelor’s degree with first
class honors in 1948. He received his Ph.D. from Oxford
University in 1950. At Oxford he was influenced by the
eminent ecologist David Lack and Nikolaas Tinbergen, a
Dutch-born British zoologist who won the Nobel Prize
for Medicine in 1973.
After receiving his degree, Hinde became curator of
the Ornithological Field Station of the Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge (now it is a sub-department of Animal Behaviour). In this early research on birds
Hinde focused on such behaviors as those involved in
courtship and conflicts in motivation. During the 1950s,
spurred in part by research in imprinting (an ethological
term for rapid learning that only takes place in a certain
developmental period that is very resistant to change and
effects later social interaction), and an interdisciplinary
conference led by psychoanalyst John Bowlby, Hinde became interested in human and primate development. In the
late 1950s Hinde established a group of rhesus monkeys at
the field station to look at the consequences of short-term
separation between mother and infant.
Hinde’s research with non-human primates in the
1960s and 1970s led to his interest in the nature and dynamics of relationships between people, and eventually
to relationships between family members and between
peers. Hinde’s interest in how psychology and ethology
are related lead him to write Animal Behaviour: A Synthesis of Ethology and Comparative Psychology (1966),
a groundbreaking scholarly work that helped integrate
research in psychology and ethology.
Some of Hinde’s numerous books include Biological Bases of Human Social Behaviour (1974) and Individuals, Relationships and Culture (1987). His book, Towards Understanding Relationships (1979), classifies
the chief dimensions of interpersonal relationships, and
shows how his categories of behavior relate to the major
theories of interpersonal dynamics. In the 1980s, Hinde
and his wife Joan Stevenson-Hinde researched preschool
children’s family and school relationships, and how they
affected personality development. In 1997 he published
Relationships: A Dialectical Perspective.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Hinde was married to Hester Cecily Cotts in 1968.
They had four children before divorcing three years later.
He married his current wife, Joan Stevenson-Hinde, in
1971. They had two children. He is currently Professor
Emeritus in the Department of Zoology, University of
Cambridge, U.K.
Marie Doorey
Further Reading
Cambridge University Website. Hinde’s Page
http://www.zoo.cam.ac.uk/zoostaff/hinde.htm.
Corsini, R.J., editor. “Hinde, Robert A, (1923- )” In Encyclopedia of psychology, 2nd Ed., V. 4. New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1994.
Hinde, Robert A. Curriculum Vitae. (courtesy of Robert
Hinde), 2000.
Timberlake, W. “Hinde, Robert Aubrey.” In Biographical dictionary of psychology. London and New York: Routledge,
1997.

Further Information

propriate. These individuals pursue a fast-paced social
and romantic lifestyle, although their relationships usually are shallow and fleeting. They also tend to be dependent on others.
The use of the term “histrionic” by professional in
psychology is relatively recent and replaces the term
“hysterical,” which has been dropped due to its negative
and sexist associations. Women are more likely than
men to be diagnosed with histrionic personality disorder, although this may at least partly reflect gender and
cultural biases that cause this pattern of behavior to be
less easily recognized in men. Individuals with histrionic personality disorder can benefit from psychodynamic
therapy or group therapy. The latter can help by enabling these individuals to learn how they relate to others and try out new ways of relating. The goals for individuals who undergo therapy should include gaining
more control over emotional reactions and understanding how their overly dramatic behavior undermines their
relationships or careers. Medication is ineffective in
treating histrionic personality disorder, although it
might be prescribed for accompanying symptoms, such
as anxiety or depression.
Further Reading
Morrison, James. DSM-IV Made Easy: The Clinician’s Guide
to Diagnosis. New York: The Guilford Press, 1995.

St. John’s College University of Cambridge. Department of
Zoology, Downing Street, Cambridge, U.K. CB2 3EJ.

Holtzman inkblot technique

Histrionic personality
disorder
A maladaptive or inflexible pattern of behavior
characterized by emotional instability, excitability,
over-reactivity, and self-dramatization.

Individuals with histrionic personality disorder tend
to seek attention by exaggerating events, even if insignificant, and are immature, self-centered and often
vain. They react emotionally to the slightest provocation. Histrionic personality disorder is classified by psychologists with the group of personality disorders
characterized by overly dramatic, emotional, impulsive
or erratic reactions. People with histrionic personality
disorder seek stimulation and novelty and easily become
bored with routine situations and relationships. Their
low tolerance for inactivity leads to hedonistic or impulsive actions. They tend to be preoccupied with their appearance and attractiveness, and their demeanor is often
charming and seductive, even if this behavior is inap-

A projective test used for the assessment of personality characteristics

The Holtzman inkblot technique was developed in
an attempt to minimize certain statistical difficulties that
arise in the analysis of Rorschach results. In the Holtzman inkblot, the subject responds to each of a series of
45 ambiguous inkblots. These responses are scored to
describe and to classify the personality of the subject.
The main difference between the Holtzman inkblot and
the Rorschach inkblot technique is that in the Holtzman
technique, the subject is permitted to make only one response per inkblot. The empirical validity of the Holtzman inkblot technique, and other projective techniques,
is disputed by some authorities.
See also Rorschach technique
Further Reading
Holtzman, Wayne. Inkblot Perception and Personality. Austin:
University of Texas Press, 1961.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

305

Holtzman inkblot technique

He also has had an interest in how cross-cultural
psychological characteristics have been adaptive biologically. In this respect he has looked at sexual relationships, mother-child relationships, and, more recently, religious systems as well as international wars. His most
recent book is Why Gods Persist (1999).

Homosexuality

Homosexuality
Enduring emotional, romantic, or sexual attraction
to individuals of one’s own gender.

For most of history, open discussions about homosexuality—sexual attraction to people of one’s own gender—have been taboo. Men and women with a homosexual orientation are referred to as gay, while the term lesbian refers to women only. Homosexuality was classified
as a mental disorder until 1973, when the American
Psychiatric Association removed “homosexuality” from
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. Two decades later, bias and discrimination against
gays and lesbians still exists, but sexual orientation is
discussed more openly.
There are no reliable statistics on the number of
people who are homosexual. The American researcher
Alfred C. Kinsey conducted extensive surveys on sexual
behavior in the 1950s, and estimated that about 4% of
men and 3% of women were exclusively homosexual;
however, his research found that 37% of men and 28% of
women had had some sexual experience with a person of
their own gender. Most researchers in the 1990s estimate
the percentage of the population with homosexual orientation at about 5%, while recognizing that the estimate is
based on projections, not hard statistics.
The four components of human sexuality are biological sex, gender identity (the psychological sense of
being male or female), sexual orientation, and social sex
role (adherence to cultural norms for feminine and masculine behavior). Sexual orientation refers to enduring
emotional, romantic, sexual, or affectionate feelings of
attraction to individuals of a particular gender. Sexual
orientation may or may not be reflected by the individual
in his or her behavior, because feelings of attraction may
be repressed or ignored for any number of reasons.
Three sexual orientations are commonly recognized:
homosexual, attraction to individuals of one’s own gender; heterosexual, attraction to individuals of the opposite
gender; bisexual, attractions to members of either gender.
Through history, various theories have been proposed
regarding the source and development of sexual orientation. Many scientists believe that sexual orientation is
shaped for most people at an early age through complex
interactions of biological, psychological, and social factors. In most cases, sexual orientation emerges for most
people in early adolescence without any prior sexual experience. Many reports have been recorded by people recounting efforts to change their sexual orientation from
homosexual to heterosexual with no success. For these
reasons, psychologists believe that sexual orientation is
306

not a conscious choice that can be voluntarily changed. In
addition, scientific research over 30 years confirms that
homosexual orientation is not associated with emotional
or social problems. Based on research conducted in the
1960s, psychologists, psychiatrists, and other mental
health professionals concluded that homosexuality is not
an illness, mental disorder, or emotional problem.
The process of identity development for lesbians and
gay men, usually called “coming out,” has been found to
be strongly related to psychological adjustment. Being
able to discuss one’s sexual orientation is a sign of positive mental health and strong self-esteem for a gay man
or lesbian. But even for those gays and lesbians who have
adjusted psychologically to their sexual orientation, false
stereotypes and prejudice make the process of “coming
out” challenging. Lesbian and gay people must risk rejection by family, friends, co-workers, and religious institutions when they share their sexual orientation.
In addition, violence and discrimination are real
threats. In a 1989 national survey, almost half of the gay
and lesbian people surveyed reported being the target of
some form of discrimination or violence during their lifetime. Legal protection from discrimination and violence
for gay and lesbian people is important. Some states categorize violence against an individual on the basis of her
or his sexual orientation as a “hate crime” with more
stringent punishment. Eight U.S. states have laws
against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.
There is no scientific evidence to support the idea
that sexual orientation can be changed through therapy.
Some well-meaning parents have sought therapy to help
their child change his or her sexual orientation, especially
when the admission of homosexuality seems to be causing the child great emotional pain. In fact, there have
been reports of cases where such therapy was successful;
however, several factors in these reports cause psychologists to question the results. First, none of these cases
have been reported on by objective mental health researchers; rather, many of the reports about sexual orientation being changed through therapy have been generated by organizations who are ideologically opposed to homosexual orientation. In addition, the reports have not allowed for a realistic follow-up period. In 1990, the
American Psychological Association stated that scientific evidence does not support conversion therapy; in
fact, the evidence reveals that it can actually be psychologically damaging to attempt conversion. Sexual orientation is a complex component of one’s personality not
limited to sexual behavior. Altering sexual orientation is
to attempt to alter a key aspect of the individual’s identity.
Like people of other sexual orientations, a percentage of gays and lesbians seek counseling. They may see

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Since sexual orientation emerges in adolescence—
already a stage of challenging emotional, social, and
physical development—families of adolescent gays and
lesbians should learn as much as they can about sexual
orientation. Educational materials and support and discussion groups exist for both adolescents and their family members.
See also Bisexuality
Further Reading
Bass, Ellen, and Kate Kaufman. Free Your Mind: The Book for
Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Youth—and Their Allies. New
York: HarperPerennial, 1996.
Dynes, Wayne R., et al. Encyclopedia of Homosexuality. New
York: Garland, 1990.
Garnets, L. D., et al. “Issues in Psychotherapy with Lesbians
and Gay Men.” American Psychologist 46:9, pp. 964-72.
Garnets, L. D. and D. C. Kimmel. Psychological Perspectives
on Lesbians and Gay Male Experiences. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993.
Gonsiorek, J.C., and J.D. Weinrich. Homosexuality: Research
Implications For Public Policy. New York: Sage Publications, 1991.
Goodchilds, J. D., Psychological Perspectives on Human Diversity in America. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 1993.
Michale, Robert T., et al. Sex in America: A Definitive Survey.
Boston: Little, Brown, 1994.
Miller, Deborah A., and Alex Waigandt. Coping with Your Sexual Orientation. New York: Rosen, 1990. [For adolescents]
Rafkin, Louise, ed. Different Daughters: A Book by Mothers of
Lesbians. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1989.
Schulenburg, Joy. The Complete Guide to Gay Parenting. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1985.

Further Information
American Psychological Association. Office of Public Affairs,
750 First St., N.E., Washington, DC 20002-4242, (202)
336–5700. Email: public.affairs@apa.org.
Federation of Parents and Friend of Lesbians and Gays. P.O.
Box 27605, Washington, DC 20038, (202) 638–4200.
National Federation of Parents and Friends of Gays. 8020
Eastern Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20004, (202)
726–3223.
National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. 1734 14th Street, NW,
Washington, DC 20009, (202) 332–6483.
National Institute of Mental Health. 5600 Fishers Lane, Room
7C02, Rockville, MD 20857, (301) 443–4513.

Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays. 1012 14th Street,
NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20005, (202) 638–4200.
Sex Information and Education Counsel of the United States.
130 W. 42nd Street, Suite 2500, New York, NY 10036.

Evelyn Hooker
1907-1996
American psychologist who helped change stereotypes about homosexuals.

Evelyn Hooker’s groundbreaking work on homosexuality paved the way for greater acceptance of a group of
people who had for years been labeled “abnormal.” Modern society still finds many ways to discriminate against
gay men and lesbians, but before Hooker’s study many
viewed homosexuality as a bona fide mental disorder.
Hooker’s research proved that, aside from their sexual
preference, there was no demonstrable psychological difference between heterosexuals and homosexuals.
Evelyn (Gentry) Hooker was born on her grandmother’s farm in North Platte, Nebraska, on September
2, 1907. Next door to the farm was the home of the
Western showman “Buffalo Bill” Cody. The sixth of nine
children, young Evelyn was inspired by her mother to
pursue learning. Education for a number of years was a
series of one-room schoolhouses as the family moved
from farm to farm trying to eke out a living. When she
was of high school age, the family moved to Sterling,
Colorado, where she attended a large and surprisingly
progressive high school.
Hooker originally planned to go to a teacher’s college, but her instructors, recognizing her potential, convinced her to go instead to the University of Colorado,
where she enrolled in 1924. She took a course with the
psychologist Karl Muenzinger and decided to major in
psychology. Quickly distinguishing herself, she was offered an instructorship in her senior year. This gave her
an opportunity not only to teach but to receive a master’s
degree. She wanted to stay on at Colorado for her Ph.D.,
but Muenzinger convinced her that going to another college would broaden her education. She chose Johns Hopkins in Baltimore and received her Ph.D. in 1932.

Influenced by European experiences
Hooker took a position teaching in a women’s college outside of Baltimore. Stricken with tuberculosis in
1934, she was obliged to spend the next two years in a
sanitarium in California. She began teaching part-time
and in 1937 was awarded a fellowship to study at the Institute for Psychotherapy in Berlin. Her training went on

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

307

Evelyn Hooker

a therapist for any of the reasons many people seek
help—coping with grief, anxiety, or other mental health
or relationship difficulties. In addition, they may seek
psychological help in adjusting to their sexual orientation and in dealing with prejudice, discrimination, and
rejection. Families who are adjusting to the news that
one of their members is homosexual may also seek counseling to help with the complex feelings and prejudices
that such news may elicit.

Hormones

outside the institute as well. She lived with a Jewish family and saw firsthand what the rise of the Nazis had
meant to their lives. She also visited the Soviet Union.
What she saw in the two dictatorships left a lasting impression on her.
Upon her return to the U.S. she took a position as a
research associate at the University of California at Los
Angeles (UCLA). She quickly earned a reputation as a
brilliant teacher, and she continued to do research. In
1941 she married Donn Caldwell, a writer. The marriage
ended in 1947, and she married Edward Niles Hooker, an
English professor at UCLA. While both of these events
were significant in Hooker’s life, there was another event
that proved critical for her career.
Sam From, who took a course taught by Hooker in
the 1940s, was a homosexual. After he took Hooker’s
course the two became friends, and he posed a question
to her: Why not conduct research on homosexuals to determine whether homosexuality was some sort of disease
or disorder—or, as he believed, non-relevant to a person’s psychological makeup. Hooker was intrigued, in
part because her experiences in Europe had left her with
a heightened disdain for social injustice.
Hooker applied for a grant from the National Institute of Mental Health to study two groups of men: heterosexuals and nonclinical (i.e., not patients) homosexuals. Despite the fact that this was during one of the most
conservative periods in American political history (the
notorious McCarthy Era during the 1950s), she was
awarded the grant.

Experiments dispel beliefs about
homosexuals
Hooker’s experiments were quite simple. She assembled groups of homosexual and heterosexual males
and administered a series of standard psychological tests
to them. The test results were then presented to a panel
of experts on the assessments. No one on the panel could
determine which subjects were heterosexual and which
were homosexual; moreover, they gave the homosexual
subjects high marks on emotional adjustment and personality development.
Hooker presented her results in a series of papers in
the 1950s, the most important of which was a 1957 paper
published in the Journal of Projective Techniques entitled, “The Adjustment of the Male Overt Homosexual.”
She continued her research throughout the 1960s, and in
1967, was appointed head of a study group on homosexual issues for the National Institute of Mental Health.
One of the biggest breakthroughs came about in 1973,
when the American Psychiatric Association removed
308

homosexuality from its diagnostic handbook—in effect
saying that homosexuality was no longer recognized as a
form of mental illness.
Hooker retired from UCLA in 1970 and continued
in private practice for several years. In 1991 she was
awarded the American Psychological Association’s
Award for Distinguished Contribution to Psychology in
the Public Interest. She died at her home in Santa Monica, California, on November 18, 1996.
See also Homosexuality
George A. Milite
Further Reading
“Evelyn Hooker.” American Psychologist 47 (1992): 499-501.
Hooker, Evelyn. “A Preliminary Analysis of Group Behavior of
Homosexuals.” Journal of Psychology 42 (1956): 217-25.
Hooker, Evelyn. “The Adjustment of the Male Overt Homosexual.” Journal of Projective Techniques 21 (1957): 18-31.

Hormones
Biochemical agents that transmit messages between components of living organisms.

Hormones are biochemical messengers that regulate
physiological events in living organisms. More than 100
hormones have been identified in humans. Hormones are
secreted by endocrine (ductless) glands such as the hypothalamus, the pituitary gland, the pineal gland, the
thyroid, the parathyroid, the thymus, the adrenals, the
pancreas, the ovaries, and the testes. Hormones are secreted directly into the blood stream, where they travel to
target tissues and modulate digestion, growth, maturation, reproduction, and homeostasis. Hormones do not
fall into any one chemical category, but most are either
protein molecules or steroid molecules. These biological
managers keep the body systems functioning over the
long term and help maintain health. The study of hormones is called endocrinology.

Hypothalamus
Most hormones are released into the bloodstream by
a single gland. Testosterone is an exception, because it is
secreted by both the adrenal glands and by the testes.
The major site that keeps track of hormone levels is the
hypothalamus. A number of hormones are secreted by
the hypothalamus, and they stimulate or inhibit the secretion of hormones at other sites. When the hypothalamus detects high levels of a hormone, it reacts to inhibit

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The major hormones secreted by the hypothalamus
are corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH), thyrotropin
releasing hormone (TRH), follicle stimulating hormone
releasing hormone (FSHRH), luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH), and growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH). CRH targets the adrenal glands.
It triggers the adrenals to release adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH). ACTH functions to synthesize and release corticosteroids. TRH targets the thyroid where it
functions to synthesize and release the thyroid hormones
T3 and T4. FSH targets the ovaries and the testes where
it enables the maturation of the ovum and of spermatozoa. LHRH also targets the ovaries and the testes, helping to promote ovulation and increase progesterone synthesis and release. GHRH targets the anterior pituitary to
release growth hormone to most body tissues, increase
protein synthesis, and increase blood glucose.
The hypothalamus also secretes other important hormones such as prolactin inhibiting hormone (PIH), prolactin releasing hormone (PRH), and melanocyte inhibiting hormone (MIH). PIH targets the anterior pituitary to
inhibit milk production at the mammary gland, and PRH
has the opposite effect. MIH targets skin pigment cells
(melanocytes) to regulate pigmentation.

Pituitary gland
The pituitary has long been called the master gland
because of the vast extent of its activity. It lies deep in
the brain just behind the nose, and is divided into anterior and posterior regions. Both anti-diuretic hormone
(ADH) and oxytocin are synthesized in the hypothalamus before moving to the posterior pituitary prior to secretion. ADH targets the collecting tubules of the kidneys, increasing their permeability to and retention of
water. Lack of ADH leads to a condition called diabetes
insipidus characterized by excessive urination. Oxytocin
targets the uterus and the mammary glands in the
breasts. Oxytocin also triggers labor contractions prior to
birth and functions in the ejection of milk. The drug
pitocin is a synthetic form of oxytocin and is used medically to induce labor.
The anterior pituitary (AP) secretes a number of
hormones, including growth hormone (GH), ACTH,

TSH, prolactin, LH, and FSH. GH controls cellular
growth, protein synthesis, and elevation of blood glucose
concentration. ACTH controls secretion of some hormones by the adrenal cortex (mainly cortisol). TSH controls thyroid hormone secretion in the thyroid. In males,
prolactin enhances testosterone production; in females, it
initiates and maintains LH to promote milk secretion
from the mammary glands. In females, FSH initiates ova
development and induces ovarian estrogen secretion. In
males, FSH stimulates sperm production in the testes.
LH stimulates ovulation and formation of the corpus luteum, which produces progesteronein females, whereas
LH stimulates interstitial cells in males to produce
testosterone.

Thyroid gland
The thyroid lies under the larynx and synthesizes
two hormones, thyroxine and tri-iodothyronine. This
gland takes up iodine from the blood and has the highest
iodine level in the body. The iodine is incorporated into
the thyroid hormones. Thyroxine has four iodine atoms
and is called T4. Tri-iodothyronine has three iodine
atoms and is called T3. Both T3 and T4 function to increase the metabolic rate of several cells and tissues. The
brain, testes, lungs, and spleen are not affected by thyroid hormones, however. T3 and T4 indirectly increase
blood glucose levels as well as the insulin-promoted uptake of glucose by fat cells. Their release is modulated
by TRH-RH from the hypothalamus. When temperature
drops, a metabolic increase is triggered by TSH. Chronic
stress seems to reduce TSH secretion which, in turn, decreases T3 and T4 output.
Depressed T3 and T4 production is the trademark of
hypothyroidism. If it occurs in young children, this decreased activity can cause physical and mental retardation. In adults, it creates sluggishness—mentally and
physically—and is characterized further by weight gain,
poor hair growth, and a swollen neck. Excessive T3 and
T4 cause sweating, nervousness, weight loss, and fatigue. The thyroid also secretes calcitonin, which serves
to reduce blood calcium levels. Calcitonin’s role is particularly significant in children whose bones are still
forming.

Parathyroid glands
The parathyroid glands are attached to the bottom of
the thyroid gland. They secrete the polypeptide parathyroid hormone (PTH), which plays a crucial role in monitoring blood calcium and phosphate levels. Calcium is a
critical element for the human body. Even though the
majority of calcium is in bone, it is also used by muscles,
including cardiac muscle, for contractions, and by nerves

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

309

Hormones

further production. When low levels of a hormone are
detected, the hypothalamus reacts to stimulate hormone
production or secretion. The body handles the hormone
estrogen differently. Each month, the Graafian follicle in
the ovary releases increasing amounts of estrogen into
the bloodstream as the egg develops. When estrogen levels rise to a certain point, the pituitary gland secretes
luteinizing hormone (LH), which triggers the egg’s release into the oviduct.

Hormones

in the release of neurotransmitters. Calcium is a powerful messenger in the immune response of inflammation
and blood clotting. Both PTH and calcitonin regulate
calcium levels in the kidneys, the gut, bone, and blood.
PTH deficiency can be due to autoimmune diseases
or to inherited parathyroid gland problems. Low PTH capabilities cause depressed blood calcium levels and neuromuscular problems. Very low PTH can lead to tetany
or muscle spasms. Excess PTH can lead to weakened
bones because it causes too much calcium to be drawn
from the bones and to be excreted in the urine. Abnormalities of bone mineral deposits can lead to a number
of conditions, including osteoporosis and rickets. Osteoporosis can be due to dietary insufficiencies of calcium,
phosphate, or vitamin C. The end result is a loss of bone
mass. Rickets is usually caused by a vitamin D deficiency and results in lower rates of bone formation in children. These examples show the importance of a balanced, nutritious diet for healthy development.

Adrenal glands

“fight or flight” response initiated in the nervous system.
This response includes increased heart rate, peripheral
blood vessel constriction, sweating, spleen contraction,
glycogen conversion to glucose, dilation of bronchial
tubes, decreased digestive activity, and low urine output.

Pancreas
The pancreas secretes the hormones insulin,
glucagon, and somatostatin, also known as growth hormone inhibiting hormone (GHIH). Insulin and glucagon
have reciprocal roles. Insulin promotes the storage of
glucose, fatty acids, and amino acids, while glucagon
stimulates mobilization of these constituents from storage into the blood. Insulin release is triggered by high
blood glucose levels. It lowers blood sugar levels and inhibits the release of glucose by the liver in order to keep
blood levels down. Insulin excess can cause hypoglycemia leading to convulsions or coma, and insufficient levels of insulin can cause diabetes mellitus, which
can be fatal if left untreated. Diabetes mellitus is the
most common endocrine disorder.

The two adrenal glands sit one on top of each kidney. Both adrenals have two distinct regions. The outer
region (the medulla) produces adrenaline and noradrenaline and is under the control of the sympathetic nervous
system. The inner region (the cortex) produces a number
of steroid hormones. The cortical steroid hormones are
derived from cholesterol and include mineralocorticoids
(mainly aldosterone), glucocorticoids (mainly cortisol),
and gonadocorticoids. Aldosterone and cortisol are the
major human steroids in the cortex. However, testosterone and estrogen are secreted by adults (both male
and female) at very low levels.

Glucagon secretion is stimulated by decreased blood
glucose levels, infection, cortisol, exercise, and large
protein meals. Among other activities, it facilitates glucose release into the blood. Excess glucagon can result
from tumors of the pancreatic alpha cells, and a mild diabetes seems to result. Some cases of uncontrolled diabetes are also characterized by high glucagon levels,
suggesting that low blood insulin levels are not necessarily the only cause in diabetes cases.

Aldosterone plays an important role in regulating
body fluids. It increases blood levels of sodium and
water and lowers blood potassium levels. Cortisol secretion is stimulated by physical trauma, exposure to cold
temperatures, burns, heavy exercise, and anxiety. Cortisol targets the liver, skeletal muscle, and adipose tissue,
and its overall effect is to provide amino acids and glucose to meet synthesis and energy requirements for metabolism and during periods of stress. Because of its
anti-inflammatory action, cortisol is used clinically to reduce swelling. Excessive cortisol secretion leads to
Cushing’s syndrome, which is characterized by weak
bones, obesity, and a tendency to bruise. Cortisol deficiency can lead to Addison’s disease, which has the
symptoms of fatigue, low blood sodium levels, low
blood pressure, and excess skin pigmentation.

The female reproductive hormones arise from the
hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary, and the ovaries. Although detectable amounts of the steroid hormone estrogen are present during fetal development, at puberty estrogen levels rise to initiate secondary sexual characteristics. Gonadotropin releasing hormone (GRH) is released
by the hypothalamus to stimulate pituitary release of LH
and FSH, which propagate egg development in the
ovaries. Eggs (ova) exist at various stages of development, with the maturation of one ovum taking about 28
days. The ova are contained within follicles that are support organs for ova maturation. About 450 of a female’s
150,000 germ cells mature to leave the ovary. The hormones secreted by the ovary include estrogen, progesterone, and small amounts of testosterone.

The adrenal medullary hormones are epinephrine
(adrenaline) and nor-epinephrine (nor-adrenaline). Both
of these hormones serve to supplement and prolong the
310

Female hormones

As an ovum matures, rising estrogen levels stimulate additional LH and FSH release from the pituitary.
Prior to ovulation, estrogen levels drop, and LH and FSH
surge to cause the ovum to be released into the fallopian

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Karen Horney

tube. The cells of the burst follicle begin to secrete progesterone and some estrogen. These hormones trigger
thickening of the uterine lining, the endometrium, to prepare it for implantation should fertilization occur. The
high progesterone and estrogen levels prevent LH and
FSH from further secretion—thus hindering another
ovum from developing. If fertilization does not occur,
eight days after ovulation the endometrium deteriorates,
resulting in menstruation. The falling estrogen and progesterone levels that follow trigger LH and FSH, starting
the cycle all over again.
In addition to its major roles in the menstrual cycle,
estrogen has a protective effect on bone loss, which can
lead to osteoporosis.
Hormones related to pregnancy include human
chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG), estrogen, human chorionic somatomammotrophin (HCS), and relaxin. HCG is
released by the early embryo to signal implantation. Estrogen and HCS are secreted by the placenta. As birth
nears, relaxin is secreted by the ovaries to relax the
pelvic area in preparation for labor.

Male hormones
Male reproductive hormones come from the hypothalamus, the anterior pituitary, and the testes. As in females, GRH is released from the hypothalamus, which
stimulates LH and FSH release from the pituitary.
Testosterone levels are quite low until puberty. At puberty, rising levels of testosterone stimulate male reproductive development including secondary characteristics.
LH stimulates testosterone release from the testes. FSH
promotes early spermatogenesis. The male also secretes
prostaglandins. These substances promote uterine contractions which help propel sperm towards an egg during
sexual intercourse. Prostaglandins are produced in the
seminal vesicles, and are not classified as hormones by
all authorities.
Further Reading
Little, M. The Endocrine System. New York: Chelsea House
Publishers, 1990.
Parker, M., ed. Steroid Hormone Action. New York: IRL Press,
1993.

Karen Horney
1885-1952
German-born American psychoanalyst who was
among the leading theorists of psychoanalysis in
the United States, and cofounder of the American
Institute of Psychoanalysis.

Karen Horney (Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with permission.)

Karen Horney was born in Hamburg, Germany, and
educated at the University of Berlin and the University
of Freiberg. She emigrated to the United States in 1932,
after having taught for two years at the Berlin Institute of
Psychoanalysis. From 1932-34, she was assistant director of the Chicago Institute for Psychoanalysis; she then
left for New York City. In 1935, she was elected to the
New York Psychoanalytic Society. Horney believed that
personality is significantly affected by the unconscious
mind, but she also theorized that both interpersonal relationships and societal factors were key factors contributing to mental development. She became increasingly
outspoken in her disagreements with the theories developed by Sigmund Freud on the nature of neuroses and
personality. Where Freud advanced a biological basis for
neuroses, Horney believed that the environment of
childhood played a key role in personality development. She felt strongly that negative experiences in early
childhood could trigger anxiety in adulthood. In 1936,
Horney published her first book, The Neurotic Personality of Our Time, a highly readable work. This was followed in 1939 by New Ways in Psychoanalysis, and Self
Analysis in 1942.
In 1942, Horney cofounded the American Institute
for Psychoanalysis. She is best known for broadening the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

311

Hostility

perspective of psychoanalysis to consider childhood, environment, and interpersonal relationship. In 1955, three
years after her death, the Karen Horney Clinic was established in New York City in her honor. The Clinic provides psychoanalysis and training for analysts.
Further Reading
Rolka, Gail Meyer. 100 Women Who Shaped World History.
San Francisco: Bluewood Books, 1994.
Sayers, Janet. Mothers of Psychoanalysis. New York: W.W.
Norton, 1991.

Hostility
A persistent feeling of anger or resentment combined with a strong desire to express it or retaliate.

Hostility is a strong impulse inspired by feelings of
anger or resentment. Though hostile impulses are normal, and everyone has them from time to time (for example, when frustrated, offended, or deprived of something), a hostile person feels those impulses regularly.
She or he is always ready to take offense or feel frustrated in some way. This is often described as “having a chip
on one’s shoulder.” Hostility can play a part in anxiety
attacks, depression, compulsions, and paranoia. On a
larger scale, hostility leads to violent crime, invasions,
wars, and other acts of aggression.
Further Reading
Lerner, Harriet Goldhor. The Dance of Anger: A Woman’s
Guide to Changing the Patterns of Intimate Relationships.
New York: Perennial Library, Harper & Row, 1989.
Williams, Redford, M.D., and Virginia Williams, Ph.D. Anger
Kills: Seventeen Strategies for Controlling the Hostility that
Can Harm Your Health. New York: HarperPerennial, 1993.

Clark Hull (Archives of the History of American Psychology.
Reproduced with permission.)

emy of Alma College. His education was interrupted by
bouts of typhoid fever and poliomyelitis, giving him pause
to consider possible vocational choices; he decided upon
psychology. He then matriculated at the University of
Michigan, took his bachelor’s degree, and went on to the
University of Wisconsin, receiving his doctorate in 1918.
Staying on at Wisconsin to teach, Hull was at first torn between two schools of psychological thought which prevailed at the time: early behaviorism and Gestalt psychology. He was not long in deciding in favor of the former.

1884-1952
American psychologist who was a primary representative of the neobehaviorist school.

After an experimental project on the influence of tobacco smoking on mental and motor efficiency, Hull was
offered the opportunity to teach a course in psychological tests and measurements. Gladly accepting it, he
changed the name to “aptitude testing” and worked hard
at developing it as a sound basis for vocational guidance.
The material which he collected in this course was gathered into a book, Aptitude Testing (1928). Next, with the
help of a grant from the National Research Council, he
built a machine that automatically prepared the correlations he needed in his test-construction work.

Clark L. Hull was born in a country farmhouse near
Akron, New York, on May 24, 1884. He attended high
school for a year in West Saginaw, Michigan, and the acad-

In 1929 Hull became a research professor of psychology at the Institute of Psychology at Yale University,
later incorporated into the Institute of Human Relations.
He came to certain definite conclusions about psycholo-

Howes, Ethel Dench Puffer
See Puffer, Ethel Dench

Clark Leonard Hull

312

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The next 10 years were filled with projects dealing
not only with aptitude testing but with learning experiments, behavior theory, and hypnosis. As a representative of behaviorism, Hull fell into that school’s neobehaviorist period of the 1930s and early 1940s. His basic
motivational concept was the “drive.” His quantitative
system, based on stimulus-response reinforcement theory and using the concepts “drive reduction” and “intervening variables,” was highly esteemed by psychologists
during the 1940s for its objectivity.
Hull was probably the first psychologist to approach
hypnosis with the quantitative methodology customarily
used in experimental psychology. This combination of
experimental methods and the phenomena provided by
hypnosis yielded many appropriate topics for experimental
problems by his students. Hypnosis and Suggestibility, the
first extensive systematic investigation of hypnosis with
experimental methods, was published in 1933, incorporating the earlier, and better, part of the hypnosis program that
Hull had carried out at the University of Wisconsin.
In 1940 Hull published, jointly with C. I. Hovland,
R. T. Ross, M. Hall, D. T. Perkins, and F. B. Fitch, Mathematico-Deductive Theory of Rote Learning. Three years
later his Principles of Behavior was published, followed
by a revision of his theories in Essentials of Behavior
(1951). Hull expressed learning theory in terms of
quantification, by means of equations which he had derived from a method of scaling originally devised by L.
L. Thurstone. In his last book, A Behavior System
(1952), Hull applied his principles to the behavior of single organisms. His system stands as an important landmark in the history of theoretical psychology. He died in
New Haven, Connecticut, on May 10, 1952.
Further Reading
Beach, Frank A. Biographical memoirs. The National Academy of Sciences, vol. 33. 1959
Boring, Edwin G., et al., eds. A history of psychology in autobiography. vol. 4, 1952.
Marx, Melvin H. and William A. Hillix. Systems and theories
in psychology. 1963.

Humanistic psychology evolved in the 1960s as a reaction to psychodynamic psychology and behaviorism.
Humanists objected to the pessimistic view of human nature advocated by psychodynamic psychologists who saw
the selfish pursuit of pleasure as the root of all human behavior. They also felt that the behaviorists’ beliefs that all
human behavior is the product of environmental influences reduced people to the status of machines and did
not adequately explain the human experience. Humanists
faulted both psychodynamic psychologists and behaviorists for viewing human behavior as governed by factors
beyond personal control. In contrast, humanists emphasize people’s innate potential, and the ability of people to
determine their own destinies. The ultimate goal for the
humanistic psychologist, therefore, is to help people realize their full potential and live up to their abilities.

Theories and therapeutic applications
Two particular theoretical approaches have come to
characterize humanistic psychology. The “person-centered”
approach to therapy advocated by Carl Rogers is based on
his belief that trusting one’s experiences and believing in
one’s self are the most important elements of self-fulfillment. In person-centered therapy, abnormal behavior is
considered to be the result of a person’s failure to trust experience, resulting in a distorted or inaccurate view of the
self. There is an incongruity between the person’s current
view of himself and his “ideal” self. Person-centered therapists attempt to help people gain self-understanding and
self-acceptance by conveying empathy, warmth, and the
unconditional belief that no matter what the client says or
does, the client is still a worthwhile person.
The second influential theory of humanistic psychology was developed by Abraham Maslow. Maslow believed
that people are innately good and naturally driven to develop their potential or to achieve “self-actualization.” He believed, however, that people were driven by a hierarchy of
needs that must be fulfilled in a particular sequence in
order for self-actualization to occur. First, physiological
and safety needs must be met. Then people need to feel a
sense of belonging. Once this is achieved, people work on
their self-esteem needs and then finally self-actualization.
Maslow believed that psychological problems result from a
difficulty in fulfilling the self-esteem needs, which therefore block self-actualization. Therapy, then, is aimed at
correcting people’s inaccurate views of themselves, improving their self-esteem, and enabling them to continue
on the path toward self-actualization.

Humanistic psychology
A theoretical and therapeutic approach that emphasizes people’s uniqueness and their power to
control their own destinies.

Research
Humanistic psychologists have tended to focus on
client care rather than research, although some empirical

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

313

Humanistic psychology

gy, and in 1930 he stated that psychology is a true natural science, that its primary laws are expressible quantitatively by means of ordinary equations, and that quantitative laws even for the behavior of groups as a whole
could be derived from the same primary equations.

Human potential movement

investigation have been undertaken. Studies of the relationship between the therapist and the client have shown
that Rogers’s ideals were important to successful outcomes, making his theory very influential in the world of
counseling. In fact, empathy, warmth, and acceptance are
now commonly referred to as the “core conditions” or
“common factors” of counseling and are used by therapists of all psychological perspectives to encourage people to feel and act differently. Research into Maslow’s
theory has yielded mixed results. The primary importance of physiological and safety needs has been supported by research, however, it has not been clearly
demonstrated that fulfillment of these needs is necessary
before people can begin to self-actualize. In one important study, for example, subjects were placed in stressful
situations that threatened their physiological and safety
needs. Shortly thereafter, the researchers measured the
creativity of the participants’ answers on a test. Since
creativity is an aspect of self-actualization, it was predicted that creativity would be compromised as a result
of the stress, however, the opposite result was found; the
subjects actually became more creative in reaction to the
challenge to their survival needs.
One of the main reasons for the lack of research on
humanistic psychology is because of its philosophical
and theoretical roots. Humanists stress acceptance of
people, instead of critically examining their behavior.
Rather than seeking to uncover the common mechanisms
underlying human behavior, humanists emphasize
human uniqueness and the “phenomenological perspective”—the view that people are best understood by examining their specific, unique experiences and aspirations. This personalized view has recently become very
popular outside the field of scientific psychology. In fact,
the “Personal Power” system sold on television by Anthony Robbins is largely based on the humanistic belief
that you are responsible for creating the life you live.
Timothy Moore
Further Reading
Capuzzi, D. and D. Gross. Counseling and Psychotherapy: Theories and Interventions. New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1999.
“The Humanistic Psychologist.” Journal of the Division of Humanistic Psychology. American Psychological Association.

Human potential movement
A movement that focused on helping normal persons achieve their full potential through an eclectic
combination of therapeutic methods and disci314

plines. The movement’s values include tolerance, a
basic optimism about human nature, the necessity
of honest interpersonal communication, the importance of living life to the fullest in the “here and
now,” and a spirit of experimentation and openness
to new experiences.

William James, an early proponent of human potential and altered states of consciousness, is considered
a forerunner of the human potential movement. However, modern interest in human potential can be traced
most directly to the humanistic psychological approach
of such figures as Carl Rogers and Abraham Maslow
in the 1950s. Humanistic psychology was sometimes
referred to as the Third Force because it presented an alternative to the prevailing psychoanalytic and behaviorist
methods. Rejecting the view of behavior as determined
by childhood events or conditioned responses to external stimuli, humanistic practitioners emphasized the individual’s power to grow and change in the present and
embraced the goal of self-fulfillment through the removal of obstacles.
Maslow, together with Rogers, Rollo May, and
Charlotte Buhler, founded the American Association of
Humanistic Psychology. Subscribing to a positive, optimistic view of human nature, he popularized the concept
of self-actualization, based on his study of exceptionally successful, rather than exceptionally troubled, people.
Selecting a group of “self-actualized” figures from history, including Abraham Lincoln (1809-1865), Albert Einstein (1879-1955), and Eleanor Roosevelt (1884-1962),
Maslow constructed a list of their characteristics, some
of which later became trademark values of the human
potential movement (acceptance of themselves and others, spontaneity, identification with humanity, democratic values, creativity). In Maslow’s widely popularized
hierarchy of motivation, the basic human needs were
arranged at the bottom of a pyramid, with self-actualization at the highest level. Another of Maslow’s ideas was
the concept of the “peak experience,” a transcendent moment of self-actualization characterized by feelings of
joy, wholeness, and fulfillment.
The philosophy of Carl Rogers’s client-centered
therapy (which had been developed by 1940 but peaked
in popularity in the 1950s) resembled Maslow’s ideas in
its view of human impulses as basically positive and in
its respect for the inner resources and innate potential of
each client. Another strong influence on the development
of the human potential movement was the sensitivity
training inaugurated by Gestalt psychologist Kurt
Lewin (1890-1947) in his T-groups at the National
Training Laboratories in the late 1940s and 1950s. Under
the influence of such figures as Maslow and Rogers, sensitivity training—which had initially been used to train

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

At the center of the human potential movement was
the growth center, for which the model was the Esalen
Institute at Big Sur in California. Independent of any
university or other institution, Esalen offered workshops
by psychologists and authors on many topics of interest
to humanists. Its founder, Michael Murphy, envisioned it
as a place where humanistic psychology could be integrated with Eastern philosophies. In the mid-1960s its
roster of presenters included philosopher Alan Watts
(1915-1973), historian Arnold Toynbee (1889-1975),
theologian Paul Tillich (1886-1965), and chemist Linus
Pauling (1901-1994). Maslow became affiliated with
Esalen in 1966. By the early 1970s there were an estimated 150 to 200 growth centers modeled after Esalen
throughout the United States.
California’s status as the hub of the human potential
movement was further enhanced when Carl Rogers
moved to La Jolla in 1964, writing and lecturing at the
Western Behavioral Science Institute and later at the
Center for Studies of the Person. Central tenets of his
therapeutic approach were expanded into areas such as
philosophy and educational reform that transcended the
boundaries of psychology, and the phrases “person-centered approach” and “a way of being” began to replace
“client-centered approach.” Rogers also became a leader
in the encounter group movement, adapting the principles of client-centered therapy to a group model. These
included the belief that individuals can solve their own
problems and reach their full potential in a supportive,
permissive environment. Rogers’s model called for the
group leader to act as a non-authoritarian facilitator, creating a non-threatening atmosphere conducive to open
and honest sharing among group members.
Besides encounter groups and a variety of non-traditional therapies (including Gestalt therapy, psychodrama,
transactional analysis, primal scream therapy, and Morita
therapy), the human potential movement also embraced
a number of disciplines and practices (both Eastern and
Western) involving healing, self-improvement, and selfawareness, including Zen Buddhism, astrology, art,
dance, and various systems of body movement and manipulation. While the flashier and most eccentric aspects
of the human potential movement have largely been relegated to fads of the 1960s and 1970s, such as primal
scream therapy and EST (Erhard Seminars Training), it
endures in other forms. The American Society of Humanistic Psychologists is still an active, well-organized

group. Journals in the field include the Journal of Humanistic Psychology, Journal of Creative Behavior,
Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, and others. Beyond this, the legacy of the human potential movement
can be seen in the continuing popularity of self-improvement workshops and books and even in the recent proliferation of 12-step groups, as well as in the many ways its
values and principles continue to influence the professional work of therapists with a variety of orientations.
Further Reading
Maslow, Abraham. Toward a Psychology of Being. Princeton:
Van Nostrand, 1962.
Rogers, Carl. On Becoming a Person. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1961.
Severin, F., ed. Humanistic Viewpoints in Psychology. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1965.

David Hume
1711-1776
Scottish philosopher who developed a philosophy
of “mitigated skepticism,” which remains a viable
alternative to the systems of rationalism, empiricism, and idealism.

If one was to judge a philosopher by a gauge of relevance—the quantity of issues and arguments raised by
him that remain central to contemporary thought—David
Hume would be rated among the most important figures
in philosophy. Ironically, his philosophical writings went
unnoticed during his lifetime, and the considerable fame
he achieved derived from his work as an essayist and historian. Immanuel Kant’s acknowledgment that Hume
roused him from his “dogmatic slumbers” stimulated interest in Hume’s thought.
With respect to Hume’s life there is no better source
than the succinct autobiography, My Own Life, written
four months before his death. He was born on April 26,
1711, on the family estate, Ninewells, near Edinburgh.
According to Hume, the “ruling passion” of his life was
literature, and thus his story contains “little more than
the History of my writings.” As a second son, he was not
entitled to a large inheritance, and he failed in two family-sponsored careers in law and business because of his
“unsurmountable aversion to everything but the pursuits
of Philosophy and general learning.” Until he was past
40, Hume was employed only twice. He spent a year in
England as a tutor to a mentally ill nobleman, and from
1745 to 1747 Hume was an officer and aide-de-camp to
Gen. James Sinclair and attended him on an expedition
to the coast of France and military embassies in Vienna
and Turin.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

315

David Hume

professionals in business, industry, and other fields—
evolved into the encounter groups of the 1960s and
1970s. Encounter groups used the basic T-group techniques but shifted their emphasis toward personal
growth, stressing such factors as self-expression and intense emotional experience.

David Hume

Major works
During an earlier stay in France (1734-1737) Hume
had written his major philosophic work, A Treatise of
Human Nature. The first two volumes were published in
1739 and the third appeared in the following year. The
critical reception of the work was singularly unfortunate.
In Hume’s own words, the Treatise “fell dead born from
the press.” Book I of the Treatise was recast as An Enquiry
concerning Human Understanding and published in 1748.
The third volume with minor revisions appeared in 1751
as An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals. The
second volume of the Treatise was republished as Part 2 of
Four Dissertations in 1757. Two sections of this work
dealing with liberty and necessity had been incorporated
in the first Enquiry. Hume’s other important work, Dialogues concerning Natural Religion, was substantially
complete by the mid-1750s, but because of its controversial nature it was published posthumously.
During his lifetime Hume’s reputation derived from
the publication of his Political Discourses (1751) and sixvolume History of England (1754-1762). When he went to
France in 1763 as secretary to the English ambassador,
Hume discovered that he was a literary celebrity and a
revered figure among the philosophes. He led a very happy
and active social life even after his retirement to Edinburgh
in 1769. He died there on Aug. 25, 1776. He specified in
his will that the gravestone be marked only with his name
and dates, “leaving it to Posterity to add the rest.”

“Mitigated skepticism”
Skepticism is concerned with the truthfulness of
human perceptions and ideas. On the level of
perception, Hume was the first thinker to consistently
point out the disastrous implications of the “representative theory of perception,” which he had inherited from
both his rationalist and empiricist predecessors. According to this view, when I say that I perceive something
such as an elephant, what I actually mean is that I have
in my mind a mental idea or image or impression. Such a
datum is an internal, mental, subjective representation of
something that I assume to be an external, physical, objective fact. But there are, at least, two difficulties inherent in ascribing any truth to such perceptions. If truth is
understood as the conformity or adequacy between the
image and the object, then it is impossible to establish
that there is a true world of objects since the only evidence I have of an external world consists of internal images. Further, it is impossible to judge how faithfully
mental impressions or ideas represent physical objects.
Hume is aware, however, that this sort of skepticism
with regard to the senses does violence to common
sense. He suggests that a position of complete skepti316

David Hume (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

cism is neither serious nor useful. Academic skepticism
(the name derives from a late branch of Plato’s school)
states that one can never know the truth or falsity of any
statement (except, of course, this one). It is, however, a
self-refuting theory and is confounded by life itself because “we make inferences on the basis of our impressions whether they be true or false, real or imaginary.”
Total skepticism is unlivable since “nature is always too
strong for principle.” Hume therefore advances what he
calls “mitigated skepticism.” In addition to the exercise
of caution in reasoning, this approach attempts to limit
philosophical inquiries to topics that are adapted to the
capacities of human intelligence. It thus excludes all
metaphysical questions concerning the origin of either
mind or object as being incapable of demonstration.

Theory of knowledge
Even though an ultimate explanation of both the
subject or object of knowledge is impossible, Hume provides a description of how man senses and understands.
He emphasizes the utility of knowledge as opposed to its
correctness and suggests that experience begins with
feeling rather than thought. He uses the term “perception” in its traditional sense—that is, whatever can be
present to the mind from the senses, passions, thought,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Theory of ideas
Hume accepts the Cartesian doctrine of the distinct
idea—conceivability subject only to the principle of contradiction—as both the unit of reasoning and the criterion of truth. For Hume, since truth is posterior to fact, the
ideas of reason only express what the mind thinks about
reality. Distinct ideas, or imaginative concepts, are pure
antinomies apart from experience as every factual proposition is equally valid a priori. But Hume does acknowledge that such propositions are not equally meaningful
either to thought or action. On the level of ideas, Hume
offers a conceptual correlative to the exemption of sensation as a form of cognition by his recognition that the
meaning of ideas is more important than their truth.
What separates meaningful propositions from mere concepts is the subjective impression of belief.
Belief, or the vivacity with which the mind conceives
certain ideas and associations, results from the reciprocal
relationship between experience and imagination. The
cumulative experience of the past and present—for example, the relational factors of constancy, conjunction, and
resemblance—gives a bias to the imagination. But it is
man’s imaginative anticipations of the future that give
meaning to his experience. Neither the relational elements of experience nor the propensive function of the
imagination, from the viewpoint of the criterion of truth,
possesses the slightest rational justification. Hence the interplay between the criterion of truth and the logic of the
imagination explains both Hume’s skepticism and his
conception of sensation and intellection.
The most celebrated example of this argument is
Hume’s analysis of the causal relation. Every statement
which points beyond what is immediately available to
the senses and memory rests on an assumption and/or
extension of the cause and effect relation. Let us examine two cases: I see lightning and hear thunder; I see a
rabbit and then a fox. The question is why I am right in
concluding that lightning causes thunder but wrong in
believing that rabbits cause foxes. Experience, in both
instances, reveals an A that is followed by B, and repeated experiences show that A is always followed by B .
While the constant conjunction of A and B might eliminate the rabbit-fox hypothesis, it is of no help in explain-

ing causality because there are all sorts of objects, such
as tables and chairs, which are similarly conjoined but
not supposed to be causally related. Thus experience reveals only that constant conjunction and priority are sufficient but not necessary conditions for establishing a
causal connection. And it is necessity, understood as that
which cannot be otherwise than it is, which makes a relation causal in the propositional form of “If A then B must
appear and if no A then no B.”
But if necessary connection explains causality, what
explains necessity? Experience yields only a particular instance and tells us nothing about the past or the future.
Nor is there any necessity discoverable in repeated experiences. That the Sun will rise tomorrow because it has in
the past is an assumption that the past necessarily causes
the future which is, of course, the connection that is to be
demonstrated. If experience cannot account for necessity,
then reason fares no better. I can always imagine the opposite of any matter of fact without contradiction. If someone tells me that Caesar died of old age or that thunder is
uncaused or that the Sun will not rise tomorrow, I will not
believe him, but there is nothing logically incorrect about
such statements since for every probability “there exists
an equal and opposite possibility.” Thus there is no justifiable knowledge of causal connections in nature, although
this is not a denial that there are real causes. Man’s supposed knowledge results from repeated associations of A
and B to the point where the imagination makes its customary transition from one object to its usual attendant,
that is, “an object followed by another, and whose appearance always conveys the thought to that other.”
Further Reading
Burton, John H. Life and correspondence of David Hume.
1846. repr. 1967.
Chappell, V.C., ed. Hume. 1966.
Flew, Antony. Hume’s philosophy of belief. 1961.
Glathe, Alfred B. Hume’s theory of the passions and of morals.
1950.
Hendel, Charles W. Studies in the philosophy of David Hume.
1963.
Mossner, Ernest C. The life of David Hume. 1954.
Passmore, John A. Hume’s intentions. 1952.
Pears, D.F., ed. David Hume: a symposium. 1963.
Sesonske, Alexander and Noel Fleming, eds. Human understanding: studies in the philosophy of David Hume. 1965.
Zabeeh, Farhang. Hume, precursor of modern empiricism. 1960.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Humor
The mental faculty of discovering, expressing, or
appreciating the ludicrous or absurdly incongruous.
317

Humor

or reflection. Nonetheless he distinguishes between impressions which are felt and ideas which are thought. In
this he stresses the difference between feeling a
toothache and thinking about such a pain, which had
been obscured by both rationalists and empiricists. Both
impressions and ideas are subdivided further into simple
and complex; for example, the idea of heat is simple,
while the idea of combustion is complex.

Hypnosis

Sigmund Freud considered humor an outlet for discharging pent up psychic energy and diminishing the importance of potentially damaging events. Since the
1970s, research on humor has shifted from a Freudian
focus to an emphasis on its cognitive dimensions, including investigations involving information-processing
theory. Humor has been found to depend on the disparity between expectations and perceptions, generally
termed “incongruity.” Not all incongruity, however, is
humorous; for humor to be evoked, the incongruous
must somehow be meaningful or appropriate, and must
be at least partially resolved. Research has shown the importance of humor both in social interaction and human
development. Developmental psychologists consider
humor a form of play characterized by the manipulation
of images, symbols, and ideas. Based on this definition,
humor can first be detected in infants at about 18 months
of age with the acquisition of the ability to manipulate
symbols. Some researchers believe that humor can be
considered present in infants as young as four months
old if the criterion used is the ability to perceive incongruities in a playful light and resolve them in some manner. Most research thus far has focused on responsiveness to humor rather than on its instigation, production,
or behavioral consequences.
Humor serves a number of social functions. It can
serve as a coping strategy, to cement allegiances, or to
test the status of relationships. One of the main signs of a
healthy ego is the ability to laugh at one’s own foibles
and mistakes. Humor can be used to lend social acceptability to forbidden feelings or attitudes, a phenomenon
at least as old as the Renaissance fool or Court Jester
who was given license to voice unpleasant truths and
mock those in positions of authority. Research has also
led to the view that humor is a way of countering anxiety
by reasserting mastery over a situation. Feelings of helplessness have been found to characterize both anxiety
and depression. (One of the signs of depression is the
inability to appreciate or use humor.) Humor gives people an opportunity to stand outside the dire aspects of a
situation, however briefly, and assert a measure of control through the ability to laugh at their predicament.
This dynamic, which drives the phenomenon known as
“gallows humor,” is expressed in the following witticism
about two contrasting cities: “In Berlin, the situation is
serious but not hopeless; in Vienna, the situation is hopeless but not serious.”
Further Reading
Dix, Albert S. Humor: the Bright Side of Pain. New York, NY:
Carlton Press, 1989.
Green, Lila. Making Sense of Humor: How to Add Joy to Your
Life. Glen Rock, NJ: Knowledge, Ideas, and Trends,
1994.
318

Hypnosis
A temporary narrowing of conscious awareness.

Practiced since ancient times, hypnosis or hypnotism remains difficult to define accurately and completely. Although the word hypnosis comes from the Greek
word hypnos, for sleep, hypnosis is actually an intense
state of concentration.
There are three degrees of hypnosis. Under light
hypnosis, the subject becomes sleepy and follows simple
directions; under deep hypnosis, the person experiences
dulling of sensory perception, similar to that of anesthesia. Under deep hypnosis, the subject can move about,
open his or her eyes, and can even undergo medical procedures with no additional anesthetic. Magicians and illusionists use deep hypnosis to make a subject behave in
unusual ways, such as to suspend the subject’s body between two chairs in a posture that is completely stiff. The
magician suggests that the subject’s body become stiff
and rigid, and the result is muscle tension powerful
enough to support the body completely. Many researchers contend that the key factor in hypnosis is the
subject’s willingness to cooperate with the hypnotist,
combined with the subject’s belief that hypnosis works.
People who are easily hypnotized are described as “suggestible”; in fact, if the subject expects to be successfully
hypnotized, it is much more likely that he or she will.
Hypnotic induction is the process by which hypnosis
is accomplished. In most situations, an individual performs the induction on a willing subject. Classical hypnotic induction involves a series of steps. First, sensory
input to the subject is restricted, and the subject is instructed to stop moving. Second, the subject’s focus of
attention is narrowed. This may be accomplished by asking him or her to focus on a specific point of light or a
spot on the wall. Finally, the hypnotist begins a pattern of
monotonous repetition. The hypnotist may repeatedly tell
the subject to relax, to breathe slowly and deeply, and to
focus attention on a fixed point. It is estimated that about
70 percent of all people can be hypnotized at some level.
Within that group, an estimated 30 percent are in the low
range, 60 percent in the middle, and 10 percent are highly
hypnotizable using the classical approach to hypnotic induction. The claim that a person could be hypnotized
against his or her will is controversial in the scientific
community. Many scientists feel that an unwilling subject
would be difficult to hypnotize, and most scientists raise
ethical questions about any attempts to do so.
While in an hypnotic trance, some subjects are able
to recall forgotten experiences. This can be useful in
treating amnesia or milder forms of memory loss. Inter-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Hypnosis

MYTHS ABOUT HYPNOSIS
Myth

Scientific response

Hypnosis places the subject in someone else's control.

Magicians and other entertainers use the illusion of
power to control their subjects' behavior. In reality,
people who act silly or respond to instructions to do
foolish things do so because they want to. The hypnotist creates a setting where the subject will follow suggestions—but the subject must be willing to
cooperate.

A subject can become "stuck" in a trance.

Subjects can come out of a hypnotic state any time
they wish. The subject has control of the process of
hypnosis, with the hypnotist simply guiding him or
her.

The hypnotist can plant a suggestion in the subject's
mind—even for something to be done in the future.

It is impossible for anyone to be implanted with suggestions to do anything against his or her will.

Hypnosis may be used to improve accuracy of the
subject's memory.

Memories recovered under hypnosis are no more reliable than others.

estingly, many subjects do not recall anything that happened while they were in the hypnotic trance; the hypnotist may direct the person to perform some act or engage
in a specific behavior after the trance state has ended.
This is termed post-hypnotic trance or post-hypnotic suggestion, and it is successful in only a small percentage of
people who are able to be hypnotized. The post-hypnotic
suggestion only works for behaviors that the subject is
willing and able to perform; an unscrupulous hypnotist
could not enlist an unwilling subject in criminal activity,
for example, by post-hypnotic suggestion. Ending the
trance is usually accomplished by a preset signal given by
the hypnotist. On occasion, the subject may wake from
the trance without the signal being given. It is unusual for
a hypnotist to have difficulty ending the induced trance.
Some people are able to hypnotize themselves in a
process called autohypnosis or self-hypnosis.
Doctors also employ hypnosis as a method of pain
management for chronic headaches, backaches, severe
burns, and during childbirth. In cancer treatment, hypnosis
is used to control the side effects of chemotherapy and as a
self-healing adjunct to chemotherapy. Hypnosis is also
used for autoimmune diseases, sleep disorders, and skin
ailments, including warts and rashes. Some surgeons use
hypnosis in the operating room, not only to reduce the
amount of anesthesia patients need, but also to lessen anxiety and postoperative swelling and bleeding. A patient in
an hypnotic trance can remain immobile for extended periods of time, avoiding aggravation of the injury. Victims
under a state of shock are also more responsive to hypnotic
induction. Dentists use hypnosis to complete dental work
on a relaxed patient without the need for anesthesia. Some

psychotherapists employ hypnotic induction to treat phobias, sexual dysfunction, stress, eating disorders, selfdestructive habits (such as smoking and other addictions)
and to improve progress on positive behavioral changes.
Hypnosis is a primary tool to gain access to memories, a
controversial issue in the mental health field. In working
with children, psychotherapists use hypnosis for enuresis,
thumb-sucking, behavioral problems and improving academic performance, among others. Psychiatrists and psychologists may also use hypnosis to learn more about the
human mind, and to help patients understand their own
emotional and personality development. This application
of hypnosis is termed hypnotherapy. In law enforcement,
victims of and witnesses to crimes are sometimes hypnotized to help them remember important clues.
Patients who are responsive to being hypnotized
must, first of all, be willing participants in the hypnosis
process. One psychiatrist, Dr. Herbert Spiegel, developed the Hypnotic Induction Profile (HIP) to determine
whether an individual is a good prospect for hypnosis.
When the subject rolls his or her eyes back into the
head, Dr. Spiegel suggests that person is likely to be
successfully hypnotized if a great deal of white is visible on the eyeball. Other qualities included in Dr.
Spiegel’s profile include a trusting personality, preference for emotional rather than rational thinking, high
empathy for others, and an intense capacity for concentration. Other researchers have studied the hypnotic situation and theorize that creating a setting where the
subject is more likely to believe that hypnosis will work
is a key to successful hypnosis. These scientists contend
that the situation, combined with the subject’s motiva-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

319

Hypochondria

tion, has greater influence than any personality trait or
physical characteristic.
A number of professional organizations offer training and advanced training in hypnosis. Among these are
the American Society of Clinical Hypnosis, the American Board of Medical Hypnosis, the American Board of
Psychological Hypnosis, the American Board of Hypnosis in Dentistry and the American Hypnosis Board for
Clinical Social Work. The American Psychiatric Association, the American Psychological Association, and
the American Dental Association have all endorsed the
technique. Mental health professionals have used hypnosis to treat sexual dysfunction, eating disorders, smoking
and other addictions, enuresis and thumb-sucking.
Further Reading
Hammond, D. Corydon. Hypnotic Suggestions and Metaphors.
New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1990.
Manfred, Erica. “The New Uses of Hypnosis.” Cosmopolitan
(February 1996): 104+.
Rossi, E. L.The Psychobiology of Mind-Body Healing: New
Concepts of Therapeutic Hypnosis. New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1993.

Further Information
American Society of Clinical Hypnosis. 2200 East Devon Avenue,
Suite 291, Des Plaines, Illinois 60018, (847) 297–3317.
Society for Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis. 3905 Vincennes Road, Suite 304, Indianapolis, Indiana 46268,
(800) 214–1738.

Hypochondria
A mental disorder characterized by an excessive
and habitual preoccupation with personal health
and a tendency to interpret insignificant or imaginary conditions as evidence of serious disease; also
called hypochondriasis.

Typically, hypochondriacs not only falsely believe
that they have a serious disease (often, but not exclusively, of the heart or another internal organ), they persist in this belief even after being assured that they do
not have the disease by a physician (or, usually, by
many physicians). Hypochondriacs seem to have an increased sensitivity to internal sensations. It is also
thought that serious childhood illness or experience
with disease in a family member or friend may be associated with hypochondria, and that psychological stress
in early adulthood related to disease or death may precipitate or worsen this condition.
Further Reading
Baur, Susan. Hypochondria. Berkeley: University of California
Press, 1988.
320

Hypothalamus
A section of the forebrain, connected to other parts
of the forebrain and midbrain, that is involved in
many complex behaviors.

The hypothalamus, which together with the thalamus makes up the section of the forebrain called the diencephalon, is involved in such aspects of behavior as
motivation, emotion, eating, drinking, and sexuality.
Lying under the thalamus, the hypothalamus weighs only
a fraction of an ounce and is a little larger than the tip of
the thumb. It is connected to the autonomic nervous
system, and controls the entire endocrine system using
the pituitary gland to direct the work of all the other endocrine glands. If a particular section of the hypothalamus is destroyed, an overwhelming urge to eat results;
damage to another section of a male’s hypothalamus can
reduce the sex drive. Yet another part of the hypothalamus, the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN), is the site of a
person’s “internal clock” that regulates biological
rhythms according to a cycle of roughly 24 hours. From
the SCN, signals reach areas of the hindbrain that regulate sleep and wakefulness. With neurons firing on a 24or 25-hour cycle, it determines the periods of greatest
alertness—whether one is “morning person” or a “night
person.” Pathways from the SCN to the eyes connect its
circadian rhythms to external cycles of light and dark.
Different roles have been identified for various sections of the hypothalamus in interpreting and acting on
hunger signals. The ventromedial nucleus, whose neurons detect blood levels of glucose, signals when it is
time to stop eating. Rats in whom this part of the hypothalamus has been destroyed will eat extremely large
quantities of food, enough to triple their body weight.
Similarly, the lateral hypothalamus signals when it is
time to begin eating. Yet another area, the paraventricular
nucleus, appears to motivate the desire for particular
types of foods, depending on which neurotransmitters
are acting on it at a particular time.
See also Brain

Hypothesis testing
The method psychologists employ to prove or disprove the validity of their hypotheses.

When psychologists engage in research, they generate specific questions called hypotheses. Research hypotheses are informed speculations about the likely re-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

You conclude that the two groups
differ so you reject the Null Hypothesis.

You conclude that the two groups do
not differ so you fail to reject the
Null Hypothesis.

Two groups really do differ

You correctly rejected the Null
Hypothesis. You made a good decision.

You made a Type II error. You
should have said there is a difference, but you made a mistake and
said there wasn't.

Two groups really do not differ

You made a Type I error. You said
that the groups are different, but you
made a mistake.

You correctly failed to reject the
Null Hypothesis. You said that the
groups are not different, and you
were right.

sults of a project. In a typical research design, researchers might want to know whether people in two
groups differ in their behavior. For example, psychologists have asked whether the amount that we can remember increases if we can find a way to organize related information. The hypothesis here might be that the organization of related information increases the amount that a
person can remember in a learning task.
The researcher knows that such a strategy might
have no effect, however. Learning may not change or it
may actually worsen. In research, psychologists set up
their projects to find out which of two conclusions is
more likely, the research hypothesis (i.e., whether organizing related information helps memory) or its
complement (i.e., whether organizing related information does not help memory). The possibility that organizing related information will make no difference is
called the Null Hypothesis, because it speculates that
there may be no change in learning. (The word “null”
means “nothing” or “none.”) The other possibility, that
organizing related information helps to learn, is called
the Research Hypothesis or the Alternate Hypothesis.
To see which hypothesis is true, people will be randomly assigned to one of two groups that differ in the
way they are told to learn. Then the memory of the
people in the two groups is compared.

As a rule, psychologists attempt to rule out the Null
Hypothesis and to accept the Research Hypothesis because their research typically tries to focus on changes
from one situation to the next, not failure to change. In
hypothesis testing, psychologists are aware that they may
make erroneous conclusions. For example, they might reject the Null Hypothesis and conclude that performance
of people in two groups is different, that is, that one
group remembers more than the other because they organize the information differently. In reality, one group
might have gotten lucky and if the study were performed
a second time, the result might be different. In hypothesis
testing, this mistaken conclusion is called a Type I error.
Sometimes researchers erroneously conclude that
the difference in the way the two groups learn is not important. That is, they fail to reject the Null Hypothesis
when they should. This kind of error is called a Type II
error. The table below indicates the relationship among
errors and correct decisions.
Unfortunately, when researchers conduct a single
experiment, they may be making an error without realizing it. This is why other researchers may try to replicate
the research of others in order to spot any errors that previous researchers may have made.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Scientific method

321

Hypothesis testing

HYPOTHESIS TESTING

I
Identity/Identity formation
A person’s mental representation of who he or she is.

Components of identity include a sense of personal
continuity and of uniqueness from other people. In addition to carving out a personal identity based on the need
for uniqueness, people also acquire a social identity
based on their membership in various groups—familial,
ethnic, occupational, and others. These group identities,
in addition to satisfying the need for affiliation, help
people define themselves in the eyes of both others and
themselves.
Identity formation has been most extensively described by Erik Erikson in his theory of developmental
stages, which extends from birth through adulthood. According to Erikson, identity formation, while beginning
in childhood, gains prominence during adolescence.
Faced with physical growth, sexual maturation, and impending career choices, adolescents must accomplish the
task of integrating their prior experiences and characteristics into a stable identity. Erikson coined the phrase identity crisis to describe the temporary instability and confusion adolescents experience as they struggle with alternatives and choices. To cope with the uncertainties of this
stage, adolescents may overidentify with heroes and mentors, fall in love, and bond together in cliques, excluding
others on the basis of real or imagined differences.
According to Erikson, successful resolution of this
crisis depends on one’s progress through previous developmental stages, centering on fundamental issues of
trust, autonomy, and initiative. By the age of 21, about
half of all adolescents are thought to have resolved their
identity crises and are ready to move on to the adult challenges of love and work. Others, however, are unable to
achieve an integrated adult identity, either because they
have failed to resolve the identity crisis or because they
have experienced no crisis. J. E. Marcia identified four
common ways in which adolescents deal with the chal322

Developing a special talent, like playing the violin, can give
young people a sense of identity. (Photo by Clayton Wolt.
North Dakota Tourism. Reproduced with permission.)

lenge of identity formation. Those who experience, confront, and resolve the identity crisis are referred to as
“identity-achieved.” Others, termed “identity-foreclosed,” make commitments (often conventional ones,
identical or similar to those of their parents) without
questioning them or investigating alternatives. Those

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Although the phrase “identity crisis” was initially
popularized in connection with adolescence, it is not
limited to this time frame: Erikson himself initially formulated the concept in connection with World War II
veterans. A variety of changes that affect one’s work, status, or interpersonal relationships can bring on a crisis
that forces one to redefine oneself in terms of values, priorities, and chosen activities or lifestyle. In Passages,
Gail Sheehy proposed that there are actually “predictable
crises of adult life” that generally challenge people’s
conceptions of themselves and result either in personal
growth or stagnation.
See also Personality development; Self-concept
Further Reading
Erikson, Erik H. Childhood and Society. New York: W. W.
Norton, 1950.
Josselson, Ruthellen. Finding Herself: Pathways to Identity
Development in Women. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass,
1987.
Sheehy, Gail. Passages: Predictable Crises of Adult Life. New
York: E.P. Dutton, 1976.

Id
In psychoanalytic theory, the most primitive, unconscious element of human personality.

Sigmund Freud believed that human personality
consisted of three components: the id, the ego, and the
superego. The id is the part of the personality that includes such basic biological impulses or drives as eating,
drinking, eliminating wastes, avoiding pain, attaining
sexual pleasure, and aggression. The id operates on the
“pleasure principle,” seeking to satisfy these basic urges
immediately with no regard to consequences. Only when
tempered through interaction with the ego (reality) and
superego (conscience) does the id conform to what is
considered socially acceptable behavior.
According to Freud, anxiety is caused by the conflict between the id’s powerful impulses and the modifying forces of the ego and superego. The more id-driven
impulses are stifled through physical reality or societal
norms, the greater the level of anxiety. People express
their anxiety in various ways, including nervousness,

displaced aggression, and serious anxiety disorders.
Healthy personalities are those that have learned to balance the id, ego and superego forces.
Further Reading
Atkinson, Rita L.; Richard C. Atkinson; Edward E. Smith; and
Ernest R. Hilgard. Introduction to Psychology. 9th ed. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. 12th ed. Glenview,
IL: Scott, Foresman, 1988.

Imagination
A complex cognitive process of forming a mental
scene that includes elements which are not, at the
moment, being perceived by the senses.

Imagination involves the synthetic combining of aspects of memories or experiences into a mental construction that differs from past or present perceived reality,
and may anticipate future reality. Generally regarded as
one of the “higher mental functions,” it is not thought to
be present in animals. Imagination may be fantastic, fanciful, wishful, or problem-solving, and may differ from
reality to a slight or great extent. Imagination is generally considered to be a foundation of artistic expression,
and, within limits, to be a healthy, creative, higher mental function.
Observers as diverse as Plato and Samuel Taylor
Coleridge have noted two contrasting types of imagination. One is largely imitative and concerned with mentally reconstructing past events or images. Among the imitative types of imagination is eidetic imagery, which
consists of rich and vividly recalled images and is especially characteristic of children up to the age of six. Afterimages, such as the green image that appears after
looking at the color red, are a type of imitative image
and are produced by sense receptors. A synesthetic
image is produced by the conjunction of two senses such
as occurs when hearing a certain piece of music elicits a
visual image with which it is associated in the mind of
the listener. Hypnagogic images are unusually clear images produced in the state between sleep and waking.
Hallucinations are vivid, detailed images produced in
the absence of external stimuli and generally confused
with real images. Dreams are images occurring in a
sleeping state that are usually not confused with reality
once the sleeper awakes.
In contrast to imitative images, creative imagination
is associated with thought and involves the restructuring,
rather than merely the retention, of sensory impressions.
It was this faculty that Coleridge called “imagination” as

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

323

Imagination

who are “identity-diffused” shrink from making defining
choices about their futures and remain arrested, unable
to make whole-hearted commitments to careers, values,
or another person. In contrast, those in the “moratorium”
group, while unable to make such commitments, are
struggling to do so and experience an ongoing though
unresolved crisis as they try to “find themselves.”

Imitation

opposed to “fancy,” his name for imitative imagining.
One common form of creative imagination is daydreaming. At one time, daydreaming and fantasies were regarded as compensatory activities that had the function of
“letting off steam,” but recent research has cast doubt on
that theory. Creative imagination is the basis for achievements in the realms of both art and science, and students
of behavior have analyzed the creative process in hopes
of being able to encourage greater creativity through various types of training. New discoveries about the specialized functions of the right- and left-brain hemispheres
have revealed that the right-brain hemisphere is the
center for much of the mental functioning commonly regarded as creative: it is the side associated with intuitive
leaps of insight and the ability to synthesize existing elements into new wholes. These findings have been applied
by educators seeking to enhance individual creativity in
areas including writing and drawing.
After falling into neglect as an area of inquiry during
the period when behaviorism was preeminent, mental
imagery has become a significant topic of study for cognitive psychologists. Researchers have found that imagery
plays a significant role in emotion, motivation, sexual behavior, and many aspects of cognition, including learning,
language acquisition, memory, problem-solving, and perception. Mental imagery has also been found to be a useful technique in clinical work. In addition to Gestalt therapy, which has traditionally involved the use of images, a
number of image-based therapies have emerged in the
United States and elsewhere. Mental images have also
been used as a diagnostic tool to reveal feelings and attitudes not accessible through verbalization.
Further Reading
Bronowski, Jacob. The Origins of Knowledge and Imagination.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1978.

Imitation
The act of mimicking or copying; also called modeling or social learning.

Unlike behaviorist models of learning through various forms of conditioning, imitation occurs naturally
without outside stimulus or reward. In a child’s early
years, an enormous amount of learning is done through
imitation of parents, peers, and modeling based on other
stimuli, such as television. Imitative learning occurs in
primates, both human and nonhuman, but has not conclusively been proved to exist in other species.
The foremost researcher in the area of imitative
learning is Albert Bandura, whose work has focused on
324

how modeling—especially the modeling of aggressive
behavior—affects the thoughts, feelings, and behavior of
children. Bandura’s research revealed that imitation may
result in the acquisition of new responses as well as the
facilitation or inhibition of existing ones. While modeling will occur in situations where neither the observer
nor the model is rewarded for performing a particular action, Bandura found that punishment and reward can
have an effect on the modeling situation. A child will
more readily imitate a model who is being rewarded for
an act than one who is being punished. Thus, the child
can learn without actually being rewarded or punished
himself—a concept known as vicarious learning. Similarly, Bandura has shown that when a model is exposed
to stimuli intended to have a conditioning effect, a person who simply observes this process, even without participating in it directly, will tend to become conditioned
by the stimuli as well.
Further Reading
Meinhold, Patricia. Child Psychology: Development and Behavior Analysis. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing
Co., 1993.
Owens, Karen. The World of the Child. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1987.
Papalia, Diane E. A Child’s World: Infancy through Adolescence. 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990.

Imprinting
A type of learning characteristic of fowls that occurs only during a critical period of development
soon after birth.

Imprinting is the process that prompts ducklings to
form an attachment to their mothers—or whatever other
moving object that appears—within the first two days of
life. Ethologists, scientists who study the behavior of animals in their natural environment, noted the process of
imprinting as they observed newly hatched ducklings.
They discovered that if a duckling were introduced to
another moving object, alive or not, during a critical period after birth, the duckling would follow that object as
if it were the mother. Humans and even wooden decoys
successfully served as maternal substitutes after as little
as ten minutes of imprinting. It has been discovered that
once the process takes place, the ducklings will follow
the substitute, even through adverse circumstances, in
preference to a live duck. Imprinting does not take place
anytime after the first two days of life because by that
time, it is believed, ducklings develop a fear of strange
objects. There is little evidence that imprinting occurs in
humans or most other animals. It has been noted to some

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Konrad Lorenz and his famous ducks. The ducks followed
him as if he were their mother because of a process called
imprinting. (Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with
permission.)

extent in dogs, sheep, and guinea pigs. The discovery
and study of imprinting have prompted continued examination of the relative roles of instinct and acquired behavior in the process of learning.
Further Reading
Bower, Gordon H., and Ernest R. Hilgard. Theories of Learning. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1981.

Impulse control disorders
A psychological disorder characterized by the repeated inability to refrain from performing a particular action that is harmful either to oneself or others.

Impulse control disorders are thought to have both
neurological and environmental causes and are known to
be exacerbated by stress. Some mental health professionals regard several of these disorders, such as compulsive gambling or shopping, as addictions. In impulse
control disorder, the impulse action is typically preceded
by feelings of tension and excitement and followed by a
sense of relief and gratification, often—but not always—
accompanied by guilt or remorse.
Researchers have discovered a link between the control of impulses and the neurotransmitter serotonin, a
chemical agent secreted by nerve cells in the brain. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), medications such as Prozac that are used to treat depression and
other disorders, have been effective in the treatment of
impulse control disorders. The American Psychiatric
Association describes several impulse control disorders:
pyromania, trichotillomania (compulsive hair-pulling),
intermittent explosive disorder, kleptomania, patho-

A condition not listed by the American Psychiatric
Association that some experts consider an impulse-control
disorder is repetitive self-mutilation, in which people intentionally harm themselves by cutting, burning, or
scratching their bodies. Other forms of repetitive self-mutilation include sticking oneself with needles, punching or
slapping the face, and swallowing harmful substances.
Self-mutilation tends to occur in persons who have suffered traumas early in life, such as sexual abuse or the
death of a parent, and often has its onset at times of unusual stress. In many cases, the triggering event is a perceived
rejection by a parent or romantic interest. Characteristics
commonly seen in persons with this disorder include perfectionism, dissatisfaction with one’s physical appearance, and difficulty controlling and expressing emotions.
It is often seen in conjunction with schizophrenia, posttraumatic stress syndrome, and various personality disorders. Usual onset is late childhood or early adolescence;
it is more frequent in females than in males.
Those who consider self-mutilation an impulse control disorder do so because, like the other conditions that
fall into this category, it is a habitual, harmful activity.
Victims often claim that it is accompanied by feelings of
excitement, and that it reduces or relieves negative feelings such as tension, anger, anxiety, depression, and
loneliness. They also describe it as addictive. Self-mutilating behavior may occur in episodes, with periods of
remission, or may be continuous over a number of years.
Repetitive self-mutilation often worsens over time, resulting in increasingly serious forms of injury that may
culminate in suicide.
Treatment includes both psychotherapy and medication. The SSRI Clomipramine (Anafranil), often used
to treat obsessive-compulsive disorder, has also been
found effective in treating repetitive self-mutilation. Behavioral therapy can teach sufferers certain techniques
they can use to block the impulse to harm themselves,
such as spending more time in public places (because
self-mutilating behavior is almost always practiced secretly), using music to alter the mental state that leads to
self-mutilation, and wearing protective garments to prevent or lessen injury. In-depth psychodynamic therapy
can help persons with the disorder express the feelings
that lead them to harm themselves.
Further Reading
Koziol, Leonard F., Chris E. Stout, and Douglas H. Ruben, eds.
Handbook of Childhood Impulse Disorders and ADHD:
Theory and Practice. Springfield, IL: C.C. Thomas, 1993.
Stein, D.J., ed. Impulsivity and Aggression. Chichester, NY:
Wiley, 1995.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

325

Impulse control disorders

logical gambling, and other impulse-control disorders
not otherwise specified.

Incest

Incest
Prohibited sexual relations between members of a
close kinship group, such as between parents and
children or between brothers and sisters. The term
is often expanded to include not only actual intercourse but other sexual acts as well.

While the incest taboo is nearly universal and exists
in nearly all societies, notions of kinship vary greatly
from culture to culture. Thus, some cultures would consider sexual relations between first cousins incest, while
others would not. The same premise holds true for intercourse between a stepfather and stepdaughter. The very
rare exceptions to incest, such as those found in ancient
Egyptian and Incan societies, usually involve mandatory
incestuous unions within royal families, which may have
been motivated by economic or theocratic considerations.
In classical psychoanalytic theory, the psychosexual
development of children between the ages of three and
five is characterized by incestuous desires toward the
parent of the opposite sex. Sigmund Freud called these
desires in males the Oedipus complex, referring to the
inadvertent incest between the title character and his
mother in the classical Greek tragedy, Oedipus Rex.
Freud asserted that young boys form a sexual attachment to their mothers, accompanied by resentment and
hostility toward their fathers, whom they regard as rivals
for their mother’s attention. The fear of retaliation by
the father, which takes the form of castration anxiety,
leads the boy to renounce his forbidden desires and
begin to identify with his father, thus assuming his proper gender identity together with a superego composed
of his father’s moral values. Freud posited roughly the
same condition, in reverse, for girls, which he called the
Electra complex. While largely recognizing the widespread existence of incestuous desires (which many
claim is indirectly demonstrated by the very universality
of the incest taboo), contemporary psychologists differ
widely with respect to the developmental and other importance they attribute to these desires.
Among the various types of incest, sexual relations
between brother and sister and between father and
daughter are thought to occur more frequently than
mother-son incest, which is believed to be rare. The phenomenon of covert incest has been noted between mother and son, however, in which the mother acts toward her
son in a sexual manner without actually seducing him.
Usually, other members of the family are aware of the
incestuous relationship, and it will govern the psychodynamics of the entire family structure. According to contemporary reports by incest survivors, most child sexual
abuse is committed by male relatives. Fathers who abuse
326

their daughters tend to have a history of psychological
problems and emotional deprivation, and will often implement an incestuous relationship with more than one
daughter. In many cases, the mother is aware of the
abuse and either feels powerless to stop it or colludes
with the father for reasons of her own.
Contrary to popular assumptions and stereotypes,
incest occurs at all levels of society, is likely to happen in
middle and upper-class families as in poor families, and
takes place in families that appear outwardly happy, respectable, and well adjusted. Adults who have been incest victims in childhood are prone to depression, sexual dysfunction, and abusive behavior. Incest involving
an adult victim is extremely rare. Although there has
been increasing public awareness of this problem in recent years, it is believed that most cases of incest remain
unreported due to the stigma involved and the powerlessness of dependent children ensnared in incestuous relationships. Over the years, many (more or less speculative) theories have been advanced regarding the origin,
nature, structure, function, and interpretation of the incest taboo, but none has been generally accepted as completely definitive. One practical function of the taboo is
that the prohibition of incest decreases the incidence of
birth defects and recessive genetic disorders.
Further Reading
Maisch, Herbert. Incest. New York: Stein and Day, 1972.

Independent variable
The variable the experimenter manipulates.

In experimental research, psychologists create two
or more groups that are as similar as possible except for
a single change that the psychologist makes from one
group to the next. That single element that varies across
groups is called the independent variable. In more complex research, the experimenter may include more than
one independent variable.
In one experiment dealing with eyewitness testimony and jury decisions, researchers exposed the eyewitnesses to staged crimes and then had them “testify” what
they observed. One group of participants saw the staged
crime under good lighting conditions; a second group
had a less favorable viewing condition, and the third
group had only a poor view of the scene. The independent variable was the viewing condition which had three
levels, or different variations: good, moderate, and poor
visibility. The researchers investigated whether the “jurors” accepted the testimony as believable and the degree

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The researchers concluded that the independent variable (e.g., the amount of light available for viewing the
crime) had affected one dependent variable (e.g., the jurors’ acceptance of the testimony). At the same time, the
independent variable did not affect the confidence of the
eyewitnesses concerning their own testimony.

ic problems. The projects which they work on may include facilitating interpersonal relationships within a
company by training management personnel in human
relations skills, analyzing and recommending changes in
employee training programs, or conducting research to
determine what influences consumers to purchase particular products. A distinguishing characteristic of industrial psychology is that the focus of research and other
work is to solve specific practical problems.
See also Applied psychology; Vocational Aptitude
Test

Further Reading
Lindsay, R. C.; G. L. Wells; and C. M. Rumple. “Can People
Detect Eyewitness Identification Accuracy Within and
Across Situations?” Journal of Applied Psychology 67
(1981): 79-89.

Infancy
Very early childhood, generally referring to the period up to age two. During this important formative
period, children begin to develop habits and behavior patterns, and acquire many basic skills, including speech.

Inductive reasoning
Way of thinking that uses comparisons to reach
conclusions.

When a child uses inductive thinking or reasoning,
he or she engages in the evaluation and comparison of
facts to reach a conclusion. Inductive reasoning progresses from observations of individual cases to the development of a generality. (Inductive reasoning, or induction, is often confused with deductive thinking; in the
latter, general principles or conditions are applied to specific instances or situations.) If a child puts his or her
hand into a bag of candy and withdraws three pieces, all
of which are red, he or she may conclude that all the
candy is red. Inductive reasoning, or induction, is the
process by which a general conclusion is reached from
evaluating specific observations or situations.

Industrial psychology
The subfield of applied psychology in which practical problems in the workplace are addressed
through the application of psychological principles.

Some industrial psychologists, also called personnel
or organizational psychologists, may be employed by
companies to administer tests which measure employee
aptitudes or skills in hiring and placement programs.
Others work for consulting firms which offer their services to companies on a contractual basis to solve specif-

Compared to the young of other mammals, human
infants are precocious in some ways—notably sensory
development—and relatively helpless in others, such as
physical strength and mobility. At birth, the average
American infant weighs approximately 7.5 pounds (3.37
kg), although a baby born 28 weeks after conception may
weigh as little as two pounds (0.9 kg). The average length
of an American newborn is about 21 inches (53 cm).
Infants are born with several reflexes that are activated by particular stimuli, such as the grasping reflex
when a finger is placed in the palm of a baby’s hand.
Other reflexes include rooting (turning the mouth toward
the breast or bottle) and sucking. Many early reflexes—
such as reaching and performing a step-like motion—
disappear, only to reappear later. While the most important senses in human adults are vision and hearing, infants acquire much of their information about the world
through touch. At birth, a baby’s eyes and the pathways
between the eyes and the brain are not fully developed;
the eyesight of a newborn is estimated at 20-600 (an object viewed from 20 feet [609 cm] away appears as a distance of 600 feet [182 m] by an adult with 20-20 vision).
The senses of newborns are particularly well adapted for
bonding with their caregivers. Infants can see large objects close up and are especially interested in faces, and
their hearing is most acute in the range of human speech.
In the first year, the shape and proportion of an infant’s body are better suited to crawling on all fours than
to walking erect. During the first three months of life, infants also lack the lower body strength and muscular
control to support their weight standing upright. The

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

327

Infancy

of confidence of the eyewitnesses in their own testimony.
The degree to which the jurors accepted the testimony
and the stated degree of confidence by the witnesses
themselves were dependent variables. The results revealed that the jurors were more likely to believe witnesses who had seen the crime in the best lighting.

Inferiority complex

urge to stand and walk upright is very strong, however,
and babies work hard to accomplish this task. By seven
to eight months, infants can usually stand holding on to a
playpen or other object; at 10 or 11 months they can
walk with assistance, and by 13 months they can usually
take a few steps unaided.
As infants are developing physically, they are also
developing cognitively in their ability to perform such
mental processes as thinking, knowing, and remembering. The theory of childhood cognitive development developed by the Swiss psychology Jean Piaget describes
four stages of increasingly complex and abstract thought
that occur between birth and adolescence, each qualitatively different from but dependent upon the stages before
it. The first, or sensorimotor, stage, (birth to approximately two years), is a time of nonverbal, experimental basic
learning when infants gradually gain mastery of their own
bodies and external objects. By sucking, shaking, banging, hitting, and other physical acts, children at this age
learn about the properties of objects and how to manipulate them. The main goal at this stage is to achieve what
Piaget termed “object constancy,” or permanence: the
sense that objects exist even when they are not visible and
that they are independent of the infant’s own actions. This
sense forms the basis for the perception of a stable universe. The sensorimotor stage is followed by the preoperational stage (ages two to six), which involves the association of objects with words.
Infants are born with different temperaments. There
are “easy babies,” who are cheerful and seldom fuss;
difficult babies, who are often irritable; and timid babies, who are wary when approaching new situations.
Most people believe that temperament is inborn, although there is little hard evidence to prove it. Temperament’s interaction with a variety of environmental factors, including parental expectations, determines the
course of an individual’s development. The most important aspect of an infant’s socialization is forming secure
attachments, primarily to parents or other principal caregivers. Attachment problems may have a negative effect on a child’s normal development. Initially, infants
will respond positively to all contact with adults, even
though they recognize familiar faces and prefer their
mother or other primary caregiver. By the age of three
months, babies will begin to smile in response to outside stimuli, maintain eye contact, and vocalize, as distinguished from crying. Eventually, they will advance to
what Piaget called the “secondary level” of concentration, at which they are aware of social changes in addition to objects and events. During this period, infants
enjoy social contact and will fuss when left alone. They
are able to distinguish their parents from other people,
will smile and vocalize at familiar people, and will cry
328

when those individuals are absent. At the age of six or
seven months, when infants develop a conception of object permanence, an especially strong bond begins to
form with the primary caregiver, usually the mother.
This is accompanied by separation anxiety (distress at
being separated from the primary caregiver) and
stranger anxiety (shyness or fear in the presence of
strangers). Such behaviors are an integral part of normal
cognitive development and displays a healthy attachment to the primary caregiver.
During the second year of life, the infant’s focus of
socialization extends beyond the primary caregiver to the
family unit as a whole and includes gaining some control over emotions and accepting discipline. In Erik Erikson’s eight-stage theory of personality, the most important task in the first 18 months of an infant’s life is establishing a basic sense of trust in the world, accomplished
initially by the attachment formed with the primary caregivers. Sometime after his or her first birthday, an infant
begins developing a tremendous need for autonomy, inevitably accompanied by a sense of doubt and shame
brought on by learning to follow rules and social demands for self-control, including physical control (such
as toilet training). The conflict between autonomy and
doubt occupies much of a child’s second year and continues into the third. Successfully negotiated, this stage
leads to the emergence of independence and will power,
and a sense of self-awareness—which appears to depend
upon a combination of cognitive development, socialization, and linguistic skills—slowly develops during the
second year of life.
Further Reading
Owens, Karen. The World of the Child. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1987.
Papalia, Diane E. A Child’s World: Infancy through Adolescence. 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1990.

Inferiority complex
A psychological condition that exists when a person’s feelings of inadequacy are so intense that
daily living is impaired.

The term “inferiority complex” was coined in the
1920s by French psychologist Alfred Adler, a one-time
follower of Sigmund Freud who became disenchanted
with Freud’s emphasis on the influence of unconscious
factors as motivators in human behavior. While Adler
subscribed to the notion that underlying motivations play
a part in directing personality, he introduced the notion
of “ego psychology” in an effort to give equal impor-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Clark, John, ed. The Mind: Into the Inner World. New York:
Torstar Books, 1986.
Hergenhahn, B.R. An Introduction to Theories of Personality.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1980.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. Glenview, IL: Scott,
Foresman, 1988.

Information-processing
theory
A leading orientation in experimental psychology
that focuses on how people select, process, and internalize information and how they use it to make
decisions and guide their behavior.

The information-processing theory is associated with
the development of high-speed computers in the 1950s.
Researchers—most notably Herbert Simon and his colleagues—demonstrated that computers could be used to
simulate human intelligence. This development led to the
realization that computer-oriented information-processing
models could provide new insight into how the human
mind receives, stores, retrieves, and uses information. The
information-processing theory was one of several developments that ended the decades-long dominance of behaviorism in American psychology. It focused on innate
mental capacities, rather than on conditioned, externally
observable behavior. By enabling experimental psychologists to test theories about complex mental processes
through computer simulation, information-processing
models helped reestablish internal thought processes as a
legitimate area of scientific inquiry.

The information-processing theory of human cognition encompasses several basic stages. Information received from external or internal stimuli is inputted through
the senses and transformed by a variety of mental operations (including representation by symbols). It receives attention through the perceptual processes and is stored in
either short-term or long-term memory, where it interacts
with previously stored information to generate a response,
or output. These stages may take place in a number of different arrangements. The simplest is the serial model, in
which the stages occur in succession like a chain reaction,
with the output of each stage becoming the input of the
succeeding one. However, stages can also occur simultaneously, a phenomenon known as parallel processing. Serial and parallel processing can also be combined in what
are known as hybrid models. Another important characteristic of information-processing models is resource allocation—the way in which energy is distributed in the system. This refers to the fact that the efficiency of each stage
in the process may depend on whether certain other stages
are operating at the same time.
One of the many areas investigated through the use
of information-processing models is human error. Errors
that occur during the early stages of processing, such as
misunderstandings, are called mistakes, as distinguished
from slips, which occur during the selection or execution
of responses. The increased understanding of error provided by information-processing models has been useful
in eliminating a variety of technical and industrial problems by isolating and addressing their causes. Those
problems classified as mistakes often involve the size of
an information load and the way it is handled, while slips
are commonly remedied by redesigning instruments and
equipment so they can be used more efficiently.
Another area that has been investigated using information-processing theory is reaction time—the amount
of time needed to respond to a stimulus in a particular
situation. Reaction time is an important feature in the
design of automobiles and many other products. Factors
influencing reaction time include complexity of the decision required before action can be taken; stimulus-response compatibility (the physical convenience of the reaction); expectancy (it takes longer to respond to an unexpected stimulus); and the relative importance of speed
and accuracy in the required response.
Further Reading
Johnson-Laird, Philip N. The Computer and the Mind: An Introduction to Cognitive Science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988.
Lindsay, Peter H. Human Information Processing: An Introduction to Psychology. San Diego: Academic Press, 1977.
Newell, A., and H. A. Simon. Human Problem Solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1972.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

329

Information-processing theory

tance to the role of conscious factors in determining behavior. According to Adler, all humans experience feelings of inferiority as children and spend the rest of their
lives trying to compensate for those feelings. As people
replace the dependence of childhood with the independence of adulthood, the feelings of inferiority persist in
varying intensity in different people. For some people,
the sense of inferiority serves as a positive motivating
factor, as they strive to improve themselves in an effort
to neutralize the negative feelings of inferiority. Some,
however, become dominated—and, as a result, crippled—by an overwhelming sense of inadequacy. These
people, whose thoughts are so overtaken by these feelings that they cannot function normally, are said to have
an inferiority complex. The opposite of inferiority complex, a superiority complex, can also result from the inevitable early feelings of inferiority, Adler believed. This
results when a person overcompensates and places too
much emphasis on striving for perfection.

Bärbel Inhelder

Bärbel Inhelder
1913-1997
Swiss psychologist and educator.

Bärbel Inhelder is permanently linked to Jean Piaget
as a remarkable instance of scientific collaboration. Inhelder started working with Piaget in the early 1930s; by
the 1940s, as she recalled, Piaget told her he needed her “to
counter his tendency toward becoming a totally abstract
thinker.” Piaget never lost sight of his epistemological
goals, while Inhelder was much more of a psychologist.
Inhelder was born in 1913 in the German-speaking
Swiss city of St. Gall, the only child of cultured parents.
In 1932, she moved to Geneva to study at Edouard Claparède’s Rosseau Institute. At Piaget’s suggestion, she
examined children’s comprehension of conservation of
quantities. The book they published together on the subject in 1941 was the first of many other collaborations. In
her dissertation, using conservation tests as diagnostic
tools, Inhelder confirmed Piaget’s claim that the sequence of developmental stages is invariant, and showed
how mentally retarded children were fixated at a certain
stage. In exemplary Piagetian fashion, she did not focus
on test results alone, but on how subjects arrived at their
answers; this allowed her to determine their general cognitive skills as well. In 1943, after finishing her dissertation, Inhelder settled in Geneva for good; she became a
professor at Geneva University in 1948, and retired in
1983. She died in 1997.
In the 1950s, after investigating children’s conceptions of geometry and probability with Piaget, Inhelder
devised a series of clever situations to study the development of inductive reasoning. In one of them, subjects
were asked to discover the factors (length, thickness, and
so forth) that make metal rods more or less flexible. This
work led to the definition of the developmental stage of
“formal operations,” characterized by the capacity for
hypothetico-deductive thinking. This study resulted in
two influential books, The Growth of Logical Thinking
from Childhood to Adolescence (1958) and The Early
Growth of Logic in the Child (1969). In both, Inhelder
conducted the psychological research, while Piaget elaborated logical models for describing mental structures.
Inhelder’s later work with Piaget and others dealt with
mental imagery and memory (both shown to depend on
the subject’s developmental level), the effects of training
on cognitive development, and the impact of malnutrition on early intellectual development. Since the 1970s,
Inhelder analyzed problem-solving behavior in children
and adolescents, with the goal of understanding their
strategies and implicit theories.
330

Inhelder was the first to use Piagetian tests as a diagnostic tool; today, most test batteries include Piagetian items. She also created several of the most widely
replicated experiments of developmental research. By
the nature of her thinking, which was more focused
than Piaget’s on the specifically psychological processes of cognitive development, as well as by her close
personal contacts with American researches, Inhelder
played a crucial role in turning the Piagetian approach
into a mainstream paradigm of cognitive developmental psychology.
Further Reading
Inhelder, B. “Autobiography,” in G. Lindzey, ed. A History of
Psychology in Autobiography, vol. 8. Stanford: Stanford
University Press, 1989.
———. The Diagnosis of Reasoning in the Mentally Retarded
[1943]. Trans. W. B. Stephens et al. New York: J. Day, 1968.

Insanity defense
A defense in which a person can be found not
guilty, or not responsible, for a crime because, at
the time of the crime, the accused was unable to
differentiate between right and wrong, based on
the fact that the accused suffers from mental illness
or mental defect.

The insanity defense allows a mentally ill person to
avoid being imprisoned for a crime on the assumption
that he or she was not capable of distinguishing right
from wrong. Often, the sentence will substitute psychiatric treatment in place of jail time. The idea that some
people with mental illness should not be held responsible for crimes they commit dates back to the Roman Empire, if not earlier. The “not guilty by reason of insanity”
(NGRI) verdict rests in part on two assumptions: that
some mentally ill people cannot be deterred by the threat
of punishment, and that treatment for the defendant is
more likely to protect society than a jail term without
treatment.
It is important to note that “insanity” is a legal term,
not a psychological one, and experts disagree whether it
has valid psychological meaning. Critics of NGRI have
claimed that too many sane defendants use NGRI to escape justice; that the state of psychological knowledge
encourages expensive “dueling expert” contests that juries are unlikely to understand; and that, in practice, the
defense unfairly excludes some defendants. Research on
NGRI fails to support most of these claims; but some serious problems may exist with NGRI.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

One problem with discussing NGRI is that there
are, strictly speaking, 51 types of insanity defense in the
United States—one for each set of state laws, and one
for federal law. Some states allow an NGRI defense either when defendants lack awareness that what they did
was wrong (called mens rea, or literally “guilty mind”)
or lack the ability to resist committing the crime (actus
rea, “guilty act”), while other states only recognize
mens rea defenses.
Successful NGRI defenses are rare. While rates vary
from state to state, on average less than one defendant in
100—0.85 percent— actually raises the insanity defense
nationwide. Interestingly, states with higher rates of
NGRI defenses tend to have lower success rates for
NGRI defenses; the percentage of all defendants found
NGRI is fairly constant, at around 0.26 percent.
In some studies, as many as 70 percent of NGRI defendants withdrew their plea when a state-appointed expert found them to be legally sane. In most of the rest,
the state didn’t contest the NGRI claim, the defendant
was declared incompetent to stand trial, or charges were
dropped. High-profile NGRI cases involving rich defendants with teams of experts may grab headlines and inflame the debate, but they are very rare.

Mock jury studies indicate that jurors do carefully
consider and discuss many factors in an insanity defense,
but may be ignoring the local legal definitions of insanity.
Mock juries tended to render the most NGRI verdicts when
the defendant showed a lack of both ability to understand
and ability to resist committing the crime, even though no
state requires both and some consider ability to resist to be
irrelevant. In addition, personal feelings about the legitimacy of the insanity defense may influence jurors’ decisions.
One of the most devastating arguments against
NGRI is that it may unfairly exclude many defendants.
Studies suggest high rates of psychiatric illness in the
general prison population. Many mentally ill defendants
never get a chance to plead NGRI; some obviously psychotic defendants fight to prevent their attorneys from
mounting an insanity defense for them.
The unwillingness of many states to accept an actus
rea defense bothers some experts. Biochemical studies
indicate that some people have biochemical abnormalities that may make them unable to control their impulses. If this is true, these people cannot voluntarily conform to the law, and therefore they have grounds for
NGRI. On the other hand, a huge proportion of the
prison population may suffer from varying degrees of
such a mental defect—and finding them all NGRI would
probably be dangerous to society as well as not viable.

Guilty but mentally ill

Problems with NGRI
Some problems, however, have emerged with
NGRI. Regulation concerning who can testify as to the
sanity of a defendant is very inconsistent from state to
state. According to one national survey, only about 60
percent of states required an expert witness in NGRI determinations be a psychiatrist or psychologist; less than
20 percent required additional certification of some sort;
and only 12 percent required a test. So the quality of expert witnesses may vary from state to state.
The quality of post-NGRI psychiatric treatment may
be another problem. Treatment varies from state to state
in both duration and, some say, quality; some defendants
spend more time in mental institutions than they would
have spent in jail had they been convicted, some less.
NGRI defendants tend to spend more time in institutions
than patients with similar diagnoses who were not accused of a crime, which undercuts somewhat the argument that treatment, not punishment, is the goal.
In terms of preventing repeat offenses, psychiatric
treatment seems to help. Some studies suggest high posttreatment arrest rates, but these arrests tended to be for
less serious crimes. At least one study indicated that average time to arrest of these patients after release is no
higher than for the general population.

As an alternative to NGRI, some states have added a
third possible verdict to the usual trio of guilty, not guilty,
and NGRI—the verdict of “guilty but mentally ill”
(GBMI). In theory, this recognizes when a defendant’s
mental illness played an important role in a crime without
entirely causing it. The state incarcerates the defendant for
the crime, but also treats him or her for the mental illness.
Unfortunately, states with GBMI verdicts have
sometimes neglected to provide for treatment; therefore
many of these defendants are jailed without treatment,
exactly as if they had been found guilty. Another dilemma with the GBMI verdict may be an “easy out” for jurors. If a jury finds the defendant guilty, they may not
spend time worrying about whether he or she may be
sane; because they find the defendant mentally ill, they
may not address the fact that the defendant should actually be found NGRI. Hence, the insanity defense “problem” will not yield to easy solutions.
Kenneth B. Chiacchia
Further Reading
Berman, Mitchell E. and Emil F. Coccaro. “Neurobiologic correlates to violence: relevance to criminal responsibility.”
Behavioral Sciences and the Law 16: 303-318 (1998).

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

331

Insanity defense

Insanity defense statistics

Insomnia

Brewer, Steve and John Makeig. “Mental hospital loses trust of
legal system.” Houston Chronicle (Nov. 15, 1999): A, 1:5.
Caplan, Lincoln. “Annals of law: the insanity defense.” The
New Yorker (July 2, 1984): 45-78.
Lymburner, Jocelyn A. and Ronald Roesch. “The insanity defense: five years of research (1993-1997).” International
Journal of Law and Psychiatry 22(3-4): 213-240 (1999).
“Real help for inmates.” Denver Post (Nov. 14, 1999): G4:1.
Shroeder, William A. “Time to abolish the insanity defense.”
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Jan. 26, 2000): C.13.
Tolson, Mike. “Is mentally ill death row inmate sane enough to
die?” Houston Chronicle (Nov. 14, 1999): A, 1:1.

Insomnia
See Sleep disorders

Instinct
The inborn tendency of every member of a certain
species to behave in the same way given the same
situation or set of stimuli.

Behavior is considered instinctive only if it occurs
in the same form in all members of a species. Instincts
must be unlearned and characteristic of a specific
species. Animals provide the best examples of instinctive
behavior. Birds naturally build nests without being
taught and feed and protect their young in the exact same
ways. Other animals, such as squirrels or dogs, behave in
manners characteristic of only squirrels or dogs. Ethologists, scientists who study animals in their natural environments, devote much of their efforts to the observation
of instinctive behavior.
Throughout history, theorists have speculated on the
role of instinct in determining human behavior. While it
has been widely accepted that animal behavior is governed largely by innate, unconscious tendencies, the
presence and power of instincts in humans have been a
source of controversy. Early Christian theorists believed
that only animals were guided by instincts, asserting that
the absence of instinct-governed behavior and the presence of a moral code provided the major distinction between humans and animals. Instinct assumed a more
prominent place in behavior theory in later years. In the
late 1800s, William James proposed that human behavior is determined largely by instinct, and that people
have even more instinctual urges than less complex animals. James believed that certain biological instincts are
shared with animals, while human social instincts like
332

sympathy, love, and modesty also provide powerful behavioral forces.
Sigmund Freud considered instincts to be basic
building blocks of human behavior and play a central
role in his drive theory, which postulates that human
behavior is motivated by the desire to reduce the tension caused by unfulfilled instinctive urges or drives.
For instance, people eat when they are hungry because unsatiated hunger causes tension, which is reduced by eating. For Freud, the life instinct (Eros)
and its components motivate people to stay alive and
reproduce. The death instinct (Thanatos) represents
the negative forces of nature. Another theorist,
William McDougall, described instincts simply as
“inherited dispositions.”
The debate continues today over the role of instinct
in human behavior, as the balance between learned behavior and innate urges remains a subject ripe for continued research and discussion. It is useful to note a nonscientific use of the term instinct. In casual conversation, a
person may use instinct to mean “natural” or “automatic—in describing a baseball player’s instinct for batting,
for example. This use of the term would not meet the scientist’s criteria for instinct.
See also Drive reduction theory
Further Reading
Atkinson, Rita L.; Richard C. Atkinson; Edward E. Smith; and
Ernest R. Hilgard. Introduction to Psychology. 9th ed. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. 12th ed. Glenview,
IL: Scott, Foresman, 1988.

Institutionalization
Placing emotionally disturbed or psychotic people
in a therapeutic facility.

Our views of mental institutions are often colored
by media’s portrayal of them, such as in the movies One
Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest and Girl, Interrupted. With
an emphasis on care and treatment, the best institutions
offer emotionally disturbed people a better chance at life.
They can learn new skills, improve behavioral and psychological problems, and develop healthier self-esteem.
People with mild emotional or behavior problems
often benefit from a short stay at an institution and benefit from a therapy protocol that minimizes the fact of institutionalization. However, severely disturbed people require a longer stay and a highly controlled environment.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Some concerns have also been raised regarding the
institutionalization of children. In 1990, the American
Public Welfare Association estimated that 65,000 children were living in group homes, residential treatment
centers, or psychiatric hospitals. Institutionalization for
emotionally disturbed children and adolescents is usually not meant to provide long-term treatment. The average
stay ranges from several months to two years.
During the 1980s, the federal government began a
program of “deinstitutionalizing” the mentally ill. Some
returned to their families. Others found themselves in
hospitals or community health centers. Today, it is not
uncommon to see emotionally disturbed or psychotic
people living on the streets, along with other homeless
people. Local communities have been reluctant to provide alternatives to mental institutions, refusing to allow
mental health clinics, half-way houses, or group homes
to be established in their neighborhoods.

Instrumental behavior
Behavior exhibited by persons in response to certain stimuli.

Instrumental behavior is a concept that grew out of
the behavior therapy movement, originating in the
1950s with the work of H.J. Eysenck. Behavior therapy
asserts that neuroses are not the symptoms of underlying
disorders (as Sigmund Freud theorized), but are in fact
disorders in and of themselves. Further, these disorders
are learned responses to traumatic experiences in much
the same way that animals can be demonstrated to learn
a response to instrumental, or operant, conditioning.
In the classic behaviorist experiments of Ivan
Pavlov and B.F. Skinner, it was shown that animals
could be trained to respond in a learned way to external
stimuli. Humans also respond in a similar manner. If, for
instance, a child has a difficult, painful relationship with
his older brother, who is athletic and popular, he may develop a fear or hatred of all popular, athletic males that

will stay with him throughout life—even after the original stimuli for the reaction (his older brother) is absent.
This behavior is referred to as instrumental behavior.
In treating a patient to eliminate instrumental behaviors, behavioral therapists rely on several fairly well-tested techniques. Perhaps the most popular is counter-conditioning, a process in which a therapist links the stimuli
to a different instrumental behavior, or conditioned response. Other methods include flooding and modeling.
In flooding, a therapist will attempt to expose a patient to
an overload of the anxiety-producing stimuli in order to
lessen its effect. In modeling, the patient is exposed to
someone who has successfully dealt with a similar anxiety-producing stimuli.

Intelligence
An abstract concept whose definition continually
evolves and often depends upon current social values as much as scientific ideas. Modern definitions
refer to a variety of mental capabilities, including
the ability to reason, plan, solve problems, think
abstractly, comprehend complex ideas, learn
quickly, and learn from experience as well as the
potential to do so.

Several theories about intelligence emerged in the
20th century and with them debate about the nature of
intelligence, whether it is hereditary, environmental or
both. As methods developed to assess intelligence, theorizing occurred about the measurability of intelligence,
its accuracy and this field known as psychometrics. As
the 20th century drew to a close, publication of The Bell
Curve by Richard J. Herrnstein and Charles Murray in
1994 stirred the controversy. Their findings pointed to
links between social class, race, and IQ scores, despite
questions by many about the validity of IQ tests as a
measurement of intelligence or a predictor of achievement and success.
Part of the problem regarding intelligence stems
from the fact that nobody has adequately defined what
intelligence really means. In everyday life, we have a
general understanding that some people are “smart,” but
when we try to define “smart” precisely, we often have
difficulty because a person can be gifted in one area and
average or below in another. To explain this phenomenon, some psychologists have developed theories to include multiple components of intelligence.
Charles Darwin’s younger cousin, Sir Francis
Galton, inspired by the Origin of the Species, developed a forerunner of 20th-century testing in the 1860s

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

333

Intelligence

Psychologists differ widely on the long-term effects
of institutionalization. A shortage of research funds
means that little solid evidence exists to support one side
or the other. Although many improvements have been
made in the quality of mental institutions, some civilrights and patients’-rights groups claim that incidences
of neglect or below-standard care still exist. Of particular
concern is the lack of proper staff training. Detractors of
institutions also point out that patients are often sedated
without given any other form of treatment. They assert
that institutions do more harm than good.

Intelligence

when he set out to prove that intelligence was inherited.
He used quantitative studies of prominent individuals
and their families.
British psychologist and statistician Charles Spearman in 1904 introduced a central concept of intelligence
psychometrics, pointing out that people who perform
well on one type of intelligence test tend to do well on
others also. This general mental ability that carried over
from one type of cognitive testing to another, Spearman
named g—for general intelligence. Spearman concluded
that g consisted mainly of the ability to infer relationships based on one’s experiences. Spearman’s work led
to the idea that intelligence is focused on a single, main
component.
French psychologists Alfred Binet and Theodore
Simon followed in 1905, introducing the concept of
mental age to match chronological age in children with
average ability. In bright children, mental age would exceed chronological age; in slower learners, mental age
would fall below chronological age. Simon and Binet’s
test was introduced into the United States in a modified
form in 1916 by Stanford psychologist Lewis Terman,
and with it the concept of the intelligence quotient
(I.Q.), the mental age divided by chronological age and
multiplied by 100.
With the adoption of widespread testing using the
Stanford-Binet and two versions created for the Army in
World War I, the concept of the intelligence test departed
from Binet and Simon’s initial view. Intelligence became
associated with a fixed, innate, hereditary value. That is,
one’s intelligence, as revealed by IQ tests, was locked at
a certain level because of what was seen as its hereditary
basis. Although a number of well-known and respected
psychologists objected to this characterization of intelligence, it gained popularity, especially among the public.
At this time, people placed great faith in the role of
science in improving society; intelligence tests were
seen as a specific application of science that could be
used beneficially. Unfortunately, because of the nature
of the tests and because of many people’s willingness to
accept test results uncritically, people of racial minorities and certain ethnic groups were deemed to be genetically inferior with regard to intelligence compared to
the majority.
Some early psychologists thought that measuring
the speed of sensory processes and reaction times might
indicate an individual’s intelligence. This approach provided no useful results. Subsequently, tests reflecting
white American culture and its values provided the
benchmark for assessing intelligence. Although such
tests indicate the degree of academic success that an individual is likely to experience, many have questioned
334

the link to the abstract notion of intelligence, which extends beyond academic areas.
Immigration laws restricted entry into the United
States of “inferior” groups, based on the results of early
intelligence testing, according to some scholars. This
claim seems to have some merit, although many psychologists objected to the conclusions that resulted from
mass intelligence testing. In large part, the immigration
laws seemed to reflect the attitudes of Americans in general regarding certain groups of people.
In the 1940s, a different view of intelligence
emerged. Rejecting Spearman’s emphasis on g, American psychologist L.L. Thurstone suggested that intelligence consists of specific abilities. He identified seven
primary intellectual abilities: word fluency, verbal comprehension, spatial ability, perceptual speed, numerical
ability, inductive reasoning, and memory.
Taking Thurstone’s concept even further, J.P. Guilford developed the theory that intelligence consists of as
many as five different operations or processes (evaluation, convergent production, divergent production, memory, and cognition), five different types of content (visual, auditory, symbolic, semantic, and behavioral) and six
different products (units, classes, relations, systems,
transformation, and implications). Each of these different components was seen as independent; the result
being an intelligence theory that consisted of 150 different elements.
In the past few decades, psychologists have expanded
the notion of what constitutes intelligence. Newer definitions of intelligence encompass more diverse aspects of
thought and reasoning. For example, psychologist Robert
Sternberg developed a three-part theory of intelligence
that states that behaviors must be viewed within the context of a particular culture (i.e., in some cultures, a given
behavior might be highly regarded whereas in another, the
same behavior is given low regard); that a person’s experiences impact the expression of intelligence; and that certain cognitive processes control all intelligent behavior.
When all these aspects of intelligence are viewed together,
the importance of how people use their intelligence becomes more important than the question of “how much”
intelligence a person has. Sternberg has suggested that
current intelligence tests focus too much on what a person
has already learned rather than on how well a person acquires new skills or knowledge. Another multifaceted approach to intelligence is Howard Gardner’s proposal
that people have eight intelligences: logical-mathematical,
linguistic, musical, spatial, bodily-kinesthetic, interpersonal, intrapersonal and the naturalistic.
Daniel Goleman has written about an emotional intelligence of how people manage their feelings, interact

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

One feature that characterizes the newly developing
concept of intelligence is that it has broader meaning
than a single underlying trait (e.g., Spearman’s g). Sternberg and Gardner’s emergent ideas suggest that any simple attempt at defining intelligence is inadequate given
the wide variety of skills, abilities, and potential that
people manifest.
Some of the same controversies that surfaced in the
early years of intelligence testing have recurred repeatedly throughout this century. They include the question
of the relative effects of environment versus heredity,
the degree to which intelligence can change, the extent
of cultural bias in tests, and even whether intelligence
tests provide any useful information at all.
The current approach to intelligence involves how
people use the information they possess, not merely the
knowledge they have acquired. Intelligence is not a concrete and objective entity, though psychologists have
looked for different ways to assess it. The particular definition of intelligence that has currency at any given time
reflects the social values of the time as much as the scientific ideas.
The approach to intelligence testing, however, remains closely tied to Charles Spearman’s ideas, despite
new waves of thinking. Tests of intelligence tend to mirror the values of our culture, linking them to academic
skills such as verbal and mathematical ability, although
performance-oriented tests exist.
See also Culture-fair test; Stanford-Binet intelligence scales; Wechsler Intelligence Scales
Further Reading
Gardner, Howard. Intelligence Reframed: Multiple intelligences for the 21st Century. New York: Basic Books,
1999.
Gould, S.J. The Mismeasure of Man. New York: W.W. Norton,
1996.
Khalka, Jean Ed. What Is Intelligence? Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1994.

Intelligence quotient
A measurement of intelligence based on standardized test scores.

Although intelligence quotient (IQ) tests are still
widely used in the United States, there has been increasing doubt voiced about their ability to measure the mental capacities that determine success in life. IQ testing

has also been criticized for being biased with regard to
race and gender. In modern times, the first scientist to
test mental ability was Alfred Binet, a French psychologist who devised an intelligence test for children in 1905,
based on the idea that intelligence could be expressed in
terms of age. Binet created the concept of “mental age,”
according to which the test performance of a child of average intelligence would match his or her age, while a
gifted child’s performance would be on par with that of
an older child, and a slow learner’s abilities would be
equal to those of a younger child. Binet’s test was introduced to the United States in a modified form in 1916 by
Lewis Terman. The scoring system of the new test, devised by German psychologist William Stern, consisted
of dividing a child’s mental age by his or her chronological age and multiplying the quotient by 100 to arrive at
an “intelligence quotient” (which would equal 100 in a
person of average ability).
The Wechsler Intelligence Scales, developed in
1949 by David Wechsler, addressed an issue that still
provokes criticism of IQ tests today: the fact that there
are different types of intelligence. The Wechsler scales
replaced the single mental-age score with a verbal scale
and a performance scale for nonverbal skills to address
each test taker’s individual combination of strengths and
weaknesses. The Stanford-Binet and Wechsler tests (in
updated versions) remain the most widely administered
IQ tests in the United States. Average performance at
each age level is still assigned a score of 100, but today’s
scores are calculated solely by comparison with the performance of others in the same age group rather than test
takers of various ages. Among the general population,
scores cluster around 100 and gradually decrease in either direction, in a pattern known as the normal distribution (or “bell”) curve.
Although IQ scores are good predictors of academic achievement in elementary and secondary school, the
correspondence between IQ and academic performance
is less consistent at higher levels of education, and
many have questioned the ability of IQ tests to predict
success later in life. The tests don’t measure many of
the qualities necessary for achievement in the world of
work, such as persistence, self-confidence, motivation,
and interpersonal skills, or the ability to set priorities
and to allocate one’s time and effort efficiently. In addition, the creativity and intuition responsible for great
achievements in both science and the arts are not reflected by IQ tests. For example, creativity often involves the ability to envision multiple solutions to a
problem (a trait educators call divergent thinking ); in
contrast, IQ tests require the choice of a single answer
or solution to a problem, a type of task that could penalize highly creative people.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

335

Intelligence quotient

and communicate, combining the interpersonal and intrapersonal of Gardner’s eight intelligences.

Intelligence quotient

GENDER DIFFERENCES IN MATH
In the late 1970s, political scientists Sheila Tobias and
others called attention to the trend for girls to avoid and
feel anxiety about math, a fact she attributed to social
conditioning. Girls historically were discouraged from
pursuing mathematics by teachers, peers, and parents.
In the early 1990s, two studies suggested that there
might be differences in how boys and girls approach
mathematics problems. One study, conducted by researchers at Johns Hopkins University, examined differences in mathematical reasoning using the School and
College Ability Test (SCAT). The SCAT includes 50 pairs
of quantities to compare, and the test-takers must decide whether one is larger than the other or whether the
two are equal, or whether there is not enough information. Groups of students in second through sixth grade
who had been identified as “high ability” (97th percentile or above on either the verbal or quantitative sections of the California Achievement Test) participated in
the study. The boys scored higher than the girls overall,
and the average difference between male and female
scores was the same for all grade levels included in the
study. Another study by Australian researchers at the
University of New South Wales and La Trobe University
gave 10th-graders 36 algebraic word problems and
asked them to group the problems according to the following criteria: whether there was sufficient information
to solve the problem; insufficient information; or irrele-

The value of IQ tests has also been called into
question by recent theories that define intelligence in
ways that transcend the boundaries of tests chiefly designed to measure abstract reasoning and verbal comprehension. For example, Robert Steinberg’s triarchical model addresses not only internal thought processes but also how they operate in relation to past experience and to the external environment. Harvard
University psychologist Howard Gardner has posited
a theory of multiple intelligences that includes seven
different types of intelligence: linguistic and logicalmathematical (the types measured by IQ tests); spatial;
interpersonal (ability to deal with other people); intrapersonal (insight into oneself); musical; and bodilykinesthetic (athletic ability).
Critics have also questioned whether IQ tests are a
fair or valid way of assessing intelligence in members of
ethnic and cultural minorities. Early in the 20th century,
IQ tests were used to screen foreign immigrants to the
United States; roughly 80% of Eastern European immigrants tested during the World War I era were declared
336

vant information along with sufficient information.
(There were 12 problems in each category.) Students
were grouped into ability groups according to prior test
scores. Boys and girls performed equally well in identifying problems containing sufficient information, but
boys were more able than girls to detect problems that
had irrelevant information, or those that had missing information. Next, the researchers asked the students to
solve the problems. Girls performed as well as boys in
solving problems that had sufficient information, but no
irrelevant information. On the problems that contained
irrelevant information, girls did not perform as well as
boys. The researchers offered tentative conclusions that
perhaps girls are less able to differentiate between relevant and irrelevant information, and thus allow irrelevant information to confuse their problem-solving
process. The researchers hypothesized that this tendency
to consider all information relevant may reflect girls’ assumption that test designers would not give facts that
were unnecessary to reaching a solution.
Some researchers have argued that offering all-girl
math classes is an effective way to improve girls’ achievement by allowing them to develop their problem-solving
skills in an environment that fosters concentration. Others feel this deprives girls of the opportunity to learn from
and compete with boys, who are often among the
strongest math students.

“feeble-minded,” even though the tests discriminated
against them in terms of language skills and cultural
knowledge of the United States. The relationship between IQ and race became an inflammatory issue with
the publication of the article “How Much Can We Boost
IQ and Scholastic Achievement?” by educational psychologist Arthur Jensen in the Harvard Educational
Review in 1969. Flying in the face of prevailing belief in
the effects of environmental factors on intelligence,
Jensen argued that the effectiveness of the government
social programs of the 1960’s War on Poverty had been
limited because the children they had been intended to
help had relatively low IQs, a situation that could not be
remedied by government intervention. Jensen was widely censured for his views, and standardized testing underwent a period of criticism within the educational establishment, as the National Education Association
called for a moratorium on testing and major school systems attempted to limit or even abandon publicly administered standardized tests. Another milestone in the public controversy over testing was the 1981 publication of
Stephen Jay Gould’s best-selling The Mismeasure of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Many still claim that IQ tests are unfair to members
of minority groups because they are based on the vocabulary, customs, and values of the mainstream, or dominant, culture. Some observers have cited cultural bias in
testing to explain the fact that, on average, AfricanAmericans and Hispanic-Americans score 12-15 points
lower than European-Americans on IQ tests. (AsianAmericans, however, score an average of four to six
points higher than European-Americans.) A new round
of controversy was ignited with the 1994 publication of
The Bell Curve by Richard Herrnstein and Charles Murray, who explore the relationship between IQ, race, and
pervasive social problems such as unemployment, crime,
and illegitimacy. Given the proliferation of recent theories about the nature of intelligence, many psychologists
have disagreed with Herrnstein and Murray’s central assumptions that intelligence is measurable by IQ tests,
that it is genetically based, and that a person’s IQ essentially remains unchanged over time. From a sociopolitical viewpoint, the book’s critics have taken issue with
The Bell Curve’s use of arguments about the genetic nature of intelligence to cast doubt on the power of government to remedy many of the nation’s most pressing social problems.
Yet another topic for debate has arisen with the discovery that IQ scores in the world’s developed countries—especially scores related to mazes and puzzles—
have risen dramatically since the introduction of IQ tests
early in the century. Scores in the United States have
risen an average of 24 points since 1918, scores in
Britain have climbed 27 points since 1942, and comparable figures have been reported throughout Western Europe, as well in Canada, Japan, Israel, Australia, and
other parts of the developed world. This phenomenon—
named the Flynn effect for the New Zealand researcher
who first noticed it—raises important questions about intelligence testing. It has implications for the debate over
the relative importance of heredity and environment in
determining IQ, since experts agree that such a large difference in test scores in so short a time cannot be explained by genetic changes.
A variety of environmental factors have been cited
as possible explanations for the Flynn effect, including
expanded opportunities for formal education that have
given children throughout the world more and earlier exposure to some types of questions they are likely to encounter on an IQ test (although IQ gains in areas such as
mathematics and vocabulary, which are most directly
linked to formal schooling, have been more modest than
those in nonverbal areas). For children in the United
States in the 1970s and 1980s, exposure to printed texts

and electronic technology—from cereal boxes to video
games—has been cited as an explanation for improved
familiarity with the types of maze and puzzle questions
that have generated the greatest score changes. Improved
mastery of spatial relations has also been linked to video
games. Other environmental factors mentioned in connection with the Flynn effect include improved nutrition
and changes in parenting styles.
Further Reading
Bridge, R. Gary. The Determinants of Educational Outcomes:
The Impact of Families, Peers, Teachers, and Schools.
Cambridge, MA: Ballinger Publishing Co., 1979.
Eysenck, H. J. The Intelligence Controversy. New York: Wiley,
1981.
Fraser, Steven. The Bell Curve Wars: Race, Intelligence, and
the Future of America. New York: Basic Books, 1995.
Herrnstein, Richard J., and Charles Murray. The Bell Curve:
Intelligence and Class Structure in American Life. New
York: Free Press, 1994.
Kline, Paul. Intelligence: The Psychometric View. London:
Routledge, 1991.
Sternberg, R. J. Beyond IQ: A Triarchic Theory of Human Intelligence. Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1985.

Interdisciplinary treatment
Patient care plan that involves healthcare professionals from a wide variety of areas.

Holistic healthcare, the concept that the body is not
just a collection of separate and distinct parts but rather
an assemblage of interrelated components that form a
unified whole, is at the root of interdisciplinary treatment.
The holistic viewpoint is that mental health is related to
and interdependent on physical well-being, and viceversa. An interdisciplinary treatment team has the ability
to pool their knowledge and expertise towards the recovery of the whole individual, not just his or her disease.
The members and make-up of the interdisciplinary
team are tailored to the patient and his or her physical,
emotional, and functional needs. Team members may include, but are not limited to, physicians (from a variety
of medical specialties), nurse practitioners, surgeons,
psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers, school
counselors, nutritionists, physical therapists, vocational
counselors, occupational therapists, and creative therapists (i.e., art therapists, music therapists).

Origins and applications
Interdisciplinary treatment was first introduced to
mental healthcare in the United States in the late 1940s

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

337

Interdisiplinary treatment

Man, which critiqued IQ tests as well as the entire concept of measurable intelligence.

Interest inventory

by Dr. William Menninger and colleagues. Menninger,
who was then chief of Army neuropsychiatry and president and co-founder of the renowned Menninger Clinic,
would become the 75th President of the American Psychological Association (APA) in 1949, providing him
the opportunity to promote the benefits of treatment
teams to a wide audience of healthcare professionals.
Today, mental healthcare professionals are becoming
involved in a wider spectrum of what have been traditionally considered physical ailments. Psychologists have become an essential part of the treatment team in oncology
(cancer medicine), geriatric medicine, cardiology (heart
and circulatory medicine), pediatric medicine, and other
specialties. Likewise, cross-disciplinary teams have become more common in mental healthcare. Individuals
suffering from a disease such as schizophrenia, for example, may be treated by a team consisting of a psychiatrist, a psychologist, a neurologist, a vocational counselor,
a family therapist, an art therapist, and a social worker.
Some patients may require ancillary services and
after-care support such as vocational rehabilitation (job
training or retraining), independent living skills training,
social skills training, and housing assistance. For these
individuals, specialists outside of traditional medical disciplines may be integrated into the interdisciplinary team.
Interdisciplinary teams are becoming more commonplace in clinical settings that involve healthcare research, also. A program for teen pregnancy prevention
started at the University of Minnesota in 1997 is staffed
with a team of psychologists, sociologists, physicians,
nutritionists, nurses, biostatisticians, epidemiologists,
and others who can provide effective strategies, and
translate their results into meaningful research data that
can improve quality of care.
Hospice care, a treatment setting for terminally ill
patients, is another example of interdisciplinary treatment at work. Hospice patients, who are often coping
with chronic pain and with emotional and spiritual issues related to the end of life, require care that focuses
on both physical symptom relief and emotional wellbeing. Their interdisciplinary care may consist of one or
more physicians, a psychologist, a family therapist, and
other healthcare professionals. In addition, bereavement
care for the patient’s family is often worked into the
overall interdisciplinary treatment plan.
One of the challenges of an interdisciplinary treatment approach is harmonizing the varying methods and
philosophies of different professionals into a cohesive
care plan that works toward a unified treatment goal.
One approach is for the interdisciplinary team to perform
the intake interview (or initial assessment) of the patient
in a group setting to ensure unity in their treatment ap338

proach, and then follow up with regularly scheduled
meetings to create the treatment plan and adjust it as
necessary as they follow the patient’s progress.
However, the logistics of such a plan are often difficult, given the patient care load of many healthcare
providers. What is more common is the appointment of a
case manager, who is responsible for coordinating delivery of treatment and following the patient’s progress, to
organize and inform the treatment team. The manager
provides the patient with a “point person” to approach
with any problems or concerns. They also have responsibility for scheduling therapies and treatments in the correct sequence for maximum benefit to the patient, and
for coordinating aftercare services such as housing assistance and networking the patient with support groups.
Case managers are often licensed social workers, but can
also be laypeople.
Paula Ford-Martin
Further Reading
Satcher, David. Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office,
1999. [available online at www.surgeongeneral.gov]

Further Information
American Psychological Association (APA). 750 First Street,
NE, Washington, D.C., USA. 20002-4242, 202-336-5500,
800-374-2721. Email: public.affairs@apa.org.
http://www.apa.org.

Interest inventory
A test that determines a person’s preferences for
specific fields or activities.

An interest inventory is a testing instrument designed
for the purpose of measuring and evaluating the level of
an individual’s interest in, or preference for, a variety of
activities; also known as interest test. Testing methods include direct observation of behavior, ability tests, and
self-reporting inventories of interest in educational, social, recreational, and vocational activities. The activities
usually represented in interest inventories are variously
related to occupational areas, and these instruments and
their results are often used in vocational guidance.
The first widely used interest inventory was the
Strong Vocational Interest Blank, developed in 1927 by
E.K. Strong. The original test was designed for men only;
a version for women was developed in 1933. In 1974 the
Strong test was merged into the Strong-Campbell Interest

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The other most commonly administered interest inventory is the Kuder Preference Record, originally developed in 1939. The Kuder Preference Record contains
168 items, each of which lists three broad choices concerning occupational interests, from which the individual
selects the one that is most preferred. The test is scored
on 10 interest scales consisting of items having a high
degree of correlation with each other. A typical score
profile will have high and low scores on one or more of
the scales and average scores on the rest.
Other interest inventories include the Guilford-Zimmerman Interest Inventory, the G-S-Z Interest Survey,
the California Occupational Preference Survey, the Jackson Vocational Interest Survey, and the Ohio Vocational
Interest Survey. There are also inventories designed especially for children, for the disabled, and for those interested in the skilled trades.
Interest inventories are widely used in vocational
counseling, both with adolescents and adults. Since these
tests measure only interest and not ability, their value as
predictors of occupational success, while significant, is
limited. They are especially useful in helping high
school and college students become familiar with career
options and aware of their vocational interests. Interest
inventories are also used in employee selection and classification.

Intermittent explosive
disorder
Uncontrollable episodes of aggression, where the
person loses control and assaults others or destroys
property.

Persons with this disorder experience episodes of aggressive or violent behavior that result in assault of a per-

son or animal or the destruction of property. These intense episodes occur spontaneously, not in response to
provocation or threat, and individuals often express regret
as soon as the episode ends. Usually he or she does not
exhibit aggressive tendencies between episodes. This disorder can appear at any age, but is more common in adolescence through the 20s, and is more common in males.
This disorder is believed to be rare, and reliable statistics
on the frequency of occurrence are not available.
See also Impulse control disorders.

Introversion
A commonly used term for people who are quiet,
reserved, thoughtful, and self-reliant and who tend
to prefer solitary work and leisure activities.

Individuals who are quiet, reserved, thoughtful, and
self-reliant are often referred to as “introverts.” They are
likely to prefer solitary work and leisure activities. In
comparison with extroverts, who draw most of their energy from social interaction and respond to external
stimuli immediately and directly, introverts tend to mull
things over before formulating a reaction, and their energy is regenerated by time spent alone.
Carl Jung was the first psychologist to use the
terms introversion and extroversion, which literally
mean “inward turning” and “outward turning.” More recently, researchers in the field of personality, most notably Hans Eysenck, have popularized these terms.
Eysenck claims a biological basis for introversion and
extroversion, rooted in differences in sensitivity to
physical and emotional stimulation. Eysenck claims that
introverts are more sensitive to cortical arousal and thus
more likely to be overwhelmed by external stimuli while
extroverts, who are less sensitive to arousal, are more
likely to actually seek out additional stimuli. Eysenck
also created a system of personality types combining introversion and extroversion with degrees of emotionality
and stability to arrive at four types corresponding to the
classical four temperaments first delineated by Hippocrates. These types (together with Eysenck’s formulations) are melancholic (emotional and introverted);
phlegmatic (stable and introverted); choleric (stable and
extroverted); and sanguine (emotional and extroverted).
Introversion is observable even in early childhood.
An introverted child is able to entertain herself alone
for extended periods of time, while extroverts need
company most of the time. When it comes to socializing, introverts are likely to focus their attention on
only one or a few best friends rather than a larger social

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

339

Introversion

Inventory, which was further revised in 1981. The test
contains 325 activities, subjects, etc. Takers of this test
are asked whether they like, dislike, or are indifferent to
325 items representing a wide variety of school subjects,
occupations, activities, and types of people. They are also
asked to choose their favorite among pairs of activities
and indicate which of 14 selected characteristics apply to
them. The Strong-Campbell test is scored according to
162 separate occupational scales as well as 23 scales that
group together various types of occupations (“basic interest scales”). Examinees are also scored on six “general
occupational themes” derived from J.L. Holland’s interest
classification scheme (realistic, investigative, artistic, social, enterprising, and conventional).

Introversion

group. Introverts like to “look before they leap,” observing situations before they are ready to participate,
and thinking things over before they speak. They are independent, introspective thinkers, turning inward to
formulate their own ideas about things. They are more
likely than extroverts to act differently in public than
they do at home because they feel less at ease among
strangers. They prefer to concentrate on a single activity at a time and dislike interruptions. On an emotional
level, they are likely to become absorbed by their own
emotions and pay less attention to those of the people
around them. They may also be more reluctant than extroverts to talk about their feelings.
The personality traits that characterize introversion
overlap at several points with those often seen in gifted
people, such as independence of thought, the ability to
spend extended periods of time absorbed in solitary pursuits, and heightened sensitivity to social interactions.
The association between introversion and giftedness has
been reinforced by the findings of Dr. Linda Silverman
at Denver University’s Gifted Child Development Cen-

340

ter, who found that an unusually high percentage of introverted children are gifted.
Although introversion and extroversion are observable, documented personality tendencies, people generally do not conform completely to either description.
This fact is reflected, for example, in the Myers-Briggs
Type Indicator, which treats introversion and extroversion as two ends of a continuum, with most people
falling somewhere in between. Some scores come out
very close to either end, while others are virtually at the
half-way mark. However, it is possible for Myers-Briggs
test results to change over time as people change.
See also Self-conscious emotions; Shyness; Temperament
Further Reading
Campbell, Joseph, ed. The Portable [Carl] Jung. New York:
Viking, 1971.
Eysenck, Hans J. and Michael Eysenck. Personality and Individual Differences. New York: Plenum Press, 1985.
Shapiro, Kenneth Joel. The Experience of Introversion.
Durham, NC: Duke University. Press, 1975.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

J
William James
1842-1910
American philosopher and psychologist who was
the principal figure in the establishment and development of functionalism.

William James was born in New York City to a
wealthy, educated family that included the future novelist, Henry James, his younger brother. The family traveled extensively in Europe and America in James’s
youth. James studied chemistry, physiology, and medicine at Harvard College, but was unable to settle on a career, his indecision intensified by physical ailments and
depression. In 1872, at the invitation of Harvard’s president, Charles Eliot, James began teaching physiology at
Harvard and achieved a reputation as a committed and
inspiring instructor. Throughout the 1870s, his interest in
psychology—initially sparked by an article by the German physiologist Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920)—grew.
In 1875, James taught the first psychology course offered at an American university and in the same year received funding for the first psychological laboratory in
the United States.
James began writing The Principles of Psychology in
1878 and published it in 1890. It had been intended as a
textbook, but the original version, over 1,000 pages in
length, was unsuitable for this purpose (James wrote an
abridged version shortly afterwards). Nevertheless, the
original text became a seminal work in the field, lauded
for James’s influential ideas and accessible writing style.
James believed that psychology should be seen as closely
linked to physiology and other biological sciences. He
was among the earliest to argue that mental activity should
be understood as dynamic functional processes rather than
discrete structural states. The overall name generally associated with this outlook is functionalism, and it contrasts
with the structural division of consciousness into separate
elements that was the practice among early German psychologists, including Wundt, whose ideas James eventual-

William James (right) with his brother Henry.

ly came to reject. Influenced by Charles Darwin’s theories of evolution in On the Origin of Species, the functionalist view held that the true goal of psychology was the
study of how consciousness functions to aid human beings
in adapting to their environment.
Probably the most well-known individual topic
treated in Principles of Psychology is the concept of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

341

Pierre Marie Félix Janet

thought as an unbroken but constantly changing stream,
which added the phrase “stream of consciousness” to the
English language. Following in the footsteps of the
Greek philosopher Heraclitus, James argues that the
exact same sensation or idea can never occur twice, and
that all experiences are molded by the ones that precede
them. He also emphasized the continuous quality of consciousness, even when interrupted by such phenomena
as seizures or sleep. In contrast, scientific attempts to
“break up” or “freeze” consciousness in order to study
its disparate elements, such as those of Wundt or Edward
Titchener (1867-1927), seemed misguided to James.
Also treated prominently in Principles of Psychology is
the importance and power of habits, as a force either to
resist or cultivate, depending on the circumstances.
An especially influential part of James’s book is the
chapter on emotion, which expresses a principle that became known as the James-Lange Theory because the
Danish physiologist Carl Lange published similar views
at about the same time as James. The theory states that
physical responses to stimuli precede emotional ones. In
other words, James posited that emotions actually result
from rather than cause physical changes. Based on this
conclusion, James argued that a person’s emotional state
could be improved by changing his or her physical activities or attitudes.
Related to this observation about emotion were
James’s theories of the human will, which were also central to Principles of Psychology and contained the germ
of his later philosophy of pragmatism. His emphasis on
the will had its roots in his personal life: while in his
twenties, an essay on free will by the French philosopher
Charles-Bernard Renouvier (1815-1903) had inspired
him to overcome his emotional problems. James rejected
the idea of human beings responding passively to outside
influences without power over their circumstances. Having himself triumphed by a strenuous exertion of the
will, he recommended this course for others as well,
defining an act of will as one characterized by focusing
one’s attention strongly on the object to be attained.
James served as president of the American Psychological Association in 1894 and 1904. He applied
some of his psychological theories to his other studies,
including education and religion. In 1909, the year before his death, James traveled to Clark University to
meet Sigmund Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis,
during the latter’s only visit to the United States. In addition to Principles of Psychology and his other books,
James had a great impact on psychology in America
through his teaching. The work of his student G. Stanley Hall (1844-1924) provided a link between James’s
psychological theories and the functionalist school of
psychology that flourished during the 1920s. James’s
342

other books include The Will to Believe and Other Essays (1897), The Varieties of Religious Experience
(1902), Pragmatism (1907), A Pluralistic Universe
(1909), The Meaning of Truth (1909), and Essays in
Radical Empiricism (1912).
Toward the end of his career, James concentrated his
work in the area of philosophy and maintained few ties
to the field of psychology.
Further Reading
Perry, Ralph B. The Thought and Character of William James.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1948.

Pierre Marie Félix Janet
1859-1947
French psychologist particularly well-known for his
work on psychopathology and psychotherapy.

Born in Paris on May 28, 1859, Pierre Janet spent
his childhood and youth in that city. His bent for natural
sciences led him to pursue studies in physiology at the
Sorbonne at the same time that he was studying philosophy, for which he received a master’s degree in 1882.
Janet then left Paris for Le Havre and for seven years
taught philosophy there in the lycée.
Janet, however, wanted to study medicine and at the
hospital of Le Havre began to do research in hypnosis,
using the well-known medium Léonie. Through these
studies, the first of this sort, Janet came into contact with
Jean Martin Charcot, but after reading Charcot and
Hippolyte Bernheim he thought these investigators did
not sufficiently take into consideration the psychological
factors involved in neurotic phenomena. This forced
Janet to undertake a deep psychological study of the neuroses, in particular of hysterical neurosis.
In his doctoral thesis in 1889 entitled “L’Automatisme psychologique” (Psychological Automatism),
Janet devised an inventory of the manifestations of automatic activities, thinking that it would help him in
studying the “elementary forms of sensibility and conscience.” At the age of 30 he returned to Paris, and
Charcot appointed him director of the laboratory of
pathological psychology at the Salpêtrière hospital.
Janet completed his medical studies, and in 1893 he
published his medical dissertation entitled “The Mental
State of Hysterics.”
Janet was by temperament a naturalist, and during
all his life he improved his herbarium. He had the same
acquisitive attitude toward mental patients, from whom he
collected thousands of precise and detailed observations.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Jealousy
An envious emotional attitude primarily directed by
an individual toward someone perceived as a rival
for the affections of a loved one or for something
one desires, such as a job, promotion, or award.

Jealousy is a combination of emotional reactions,
including fear, anger, and anxiety. Studies have shown
that men and women tend to feel jealous for different
reasons; for instance, physical attractiveness in a perceived rival is more likely to incite jealousy in a woman
than in a man. Everyone occasionally experiences normal jealousy; caring about anyone or anything means
that one will become uncomfortable and anxious at the
prospect of losing the desired person or object to another. An unhealthy degree of apathy would be required for
an individual never to experience jealousy.

Pierre-Marie-Félix Janet (Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with
permission.)

However, in his books he attempted to give a more theoretical and depth interpretation of a few particular cases.
From 1902 until 1934 he taught at the Collège de France.
Janet’s works are numerous, and many of his writings have been translated into English. Among his books
one can cite Névroses et idées fixes (1902); Les Obsessions et la psychasténie (1903); The Major Symptoms of
Hysteria (1907, symposium undertaken in the United
States); Les Médications psychologiques (1919); De
l’angoisse à l’extase (1926); Les Débuts de l’intelligence
(1935); and L’Intelligence avant le langage (1936).
Janet characterized his dynamic psychology as
being a psychology of conduct, accepting the schema of
a psychology of behavior while integrating in his schema
conscious processes acting as regulators of action.
Janet’s work has often been compared to the work of
Freud, and his influence has been great in both North
and South America.

The opposite extreme is pathological jealousy, also
called morbid jealousy, which differs significantly from
normal jealousy in its degree of intensity. Stronger and
more long-lasting than normal jealousy, it is generally
characterized by serious feelings of insecurity and inadequacy, as well as suspiciousness or paranoia. Whereas
healthy individuals recover from jealousy fairly rapidly,
either by realizing that it is unfounded or through some
other coping mechanism, pathologically jealous people
become obsessed by their fears and constantly look for
signs that their suspicions are true, to the point where
they may find it difficult to function normally. Excessive
jealousy is unhealthy and destructive in all relationships.
By making people behave in ways that will alienate others, jealousy becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy, depriving its victims of the affection or success they are so anxious to protect. Individuals suffering from morbid jealousy are prone to severe anxiety, depression, difficulty
in controlling anger, and may engage in self-destructive
behavior or elicit suicidal tendencies.
Further Reading
White, Gregory. Jealousy. New York: Guilford Press, 1989.

Well after Janet had retired, he continued to teach
and to give conferences, manifesting a great vitality until
the time of his death on Feb. 23, 1947.
Further Reading
Murchison, Carl, et al. A history of psychology in autobiography. 4 vols. 1930-1952.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Arthur R. Jensen
1923American educational psychologist whose work
has concentrated in the study of human intelligence.
343

Arthur R. Jensen

Wolman, Benjamin B., ed. Historical roots of contemporary
psychology. 1968.

Virginia Johnson

equally distributed among the races, conceptual learning,
or synthesizing ability, occurs with significantly greater
frequency in whites than in blacks. He suggested that
from the data, one might conclude that on average, white
Americans are more intelligent than African-Americans.
Jensen suggested that the difference in average performance between whites and blacks on intelligence tests
might be the result of innate differences rather than contrasts in parental upbringing, formal schooling, or other
environmental factors. Jensen further surmised from the
data that federal educational programs such as Head
Start could only raise the IQs of disadvantage children
by only a few points and are therefore not worthy of
funding. The relative influence of heredity and environment on intelligence tests had been an area of debate
since their inception in the 1920s, and the prevailing
view of Jensen’s contemporaries was that environmental
factors in the home and school play the decisive role.

Arthur R. Jensen (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with
permission.)

Arthur Jensen was born in San Diego, California,
and attended the University of California at Berkeley,
San Diego State College, and Columbia University. He
completed a clinical internship at the University of
Maryland’s Psychiatric Institute in 1956, after which he
won a two-year postdoctoral research fellowship with
the Institute of Psychiatry at the University of London,
where he worked with Hans J. Eysenck, a prominent
psychologist known for his evolutionary approach to
human behavior. Eysenck’s work in personality theory,
measurement, and intelligence—areas that were to become Jensen’s specialty—challenged humanistic, psychodynamic approaches that stressed the importance of
social factors in human behavior. In 1958, Jensen joined
the faculty at the University of California at Berkeley,
serving as a professor of educational psychology, and
also served as a research psychologist at the Institute of
Human Learning. After early work in the area of verbal
learning, Jensen turned to the study of individual differences in human learning and intelligence.
Jensen claimed, on the basis of his research, that
general cognitive ability is essentially an inherited trait,
determined predominantly by genetic factors rather than
by environmental conditions. He also contended that
while associative learning, or memorizing ability, is
344

In 1969, Jensen published his views in a long article
entitled “How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic
Achievement?” in the Harvard Education Review, which
rekindled the age-old debate of the relative importance
of genetics in determining intellectual ability. Jensen’s
work was often misquoted by the media and was popularly denounced on college campuses. The belief in a genetic basis for individual and racial differences in intelligence and scholastic performance came to be known as
“jensenism.” Although Jensen’s work in human intelligence has received a mixed reception from professionals
in the field, his prolific publications have engaged the serious attention of many researchers and educators in the
years since. Jensen’s books include Genetics and Education (1973), Educability and Group Differences (1973),
Bias in Mental Testing (1979), and Straight Talk about
Mental Tests (1980).
See also Nature-nurture controversy
Further Reading
Jensen, Arthur. “How Much Can We Boost IQ and Scholastic
Achievement?” Harvard Education Review 39
(Winter/Summer 1969): 1-123; 449-83.

Virginia E. Johnson
1925Researcher in human sexuality who co-wrote with
her then-husband, William H. Masters, Human
Sexual Response in 1966.

In collaboration with Dr. William Howell Masters,
psychologist and sex therapist Virginia E. Johnson pioneered the study of human sexuality under laboratory

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Virginia E. Johnson

conditions. She and Masters published the results of
their study as a book entitled Human Sexual Response in
1966, causing an immediate sensation. As part of her
work at the Reproductive Biology Research Foundation
in St. Louis and later at the Masters and Johnson Institute, she counseled many clients and taught sex therapy
to many professional practitioners.
Johnson was born Virginia Eshelman on February
11, 1925, in Springfield, Missouri, to Hershel Eshelman,
a farmer, and Edna (Evans) Eshelman. The elder of two
children, she began school in Palo Alto, California,
where her family had moved in 1930. When they returned to Missouri three years later, she was ahead of her
school peers and skipped several grades. She studied
piano and voice, and read extensively. She entered Drury
College in Springfield in 1941. After her freshman year,
she was hired to work in the state insurance office, a job
she held for four years. Her mother, a republican state
committeewoman, introduced her to many elected officials, and Johnson often sang for them at meetings.
These performances led to a job as a country music
singer for radio station KWTO in Springfield, where her
stage name was Virginia Gibson. She studied at the University of Missouri and later at the Kansas City Conservatory of Music. In 1947, she became a business writer
for the St. Louis Daily Record. She also worked briefly
on the marketing staff of KMOX- TV, leaving that position in 1951.
In the early 1940s she married a Missouri politician,
but the marriage lasted only two days. Her marriage to
an attorney many years her senior also ended in divorce.
On June 13, 1950, she married George V. Johnson, an
engineering student and leader of a dance band. She sang
with the band until the birth of her two children, Scott
Forstall and Lisa Evans. In 1956, the Johnsons divorced.

Chosen by William Howell Masters as
research associate
In 1956, contemplating a return to college for a degree in sociology, Johnson applied for a job at the Washington University employment office. William Howell
Masters, associate professor of clinical obstetrics and gynecology, had requested an assistant to interview volunteers for a research project. He personally chose Johnson, who fitted the need for an outgoing, intelligent, mature woman who was preferably a mother. Johnson
began work on January 2, 1957, as a research associate,
but soon advanced to research instructor.
Gathering scientific data by means of electroencephalography, electrocardiography, and the use of color
monitors, Masters and Johnson measured and analyzed
694 volunteers. They were careful to protect the privacy

Virginia Johnson, left, with coworker William Masters.
(UPI/Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with permission.)

of their subjects, who were photographed in various
modes of sexual stimulation. In addition to a description
of the four stages of sexual arousal, other valuable information was gained from the photographs, including evidence of the failure of some contraceptives, the discovery of a vaginal secretion in some women that prevents
conception, and the observation that sexual enjoyment
need not decrease with age. In 1964, Masters and Johnson created the non-profit Reproductive Biology Research Foundation in St. Louis and began treating couples for sexual problems. Originally listed as a research
associate, Johnson became assistant director of the Foundation in 1969 and co-director in 1973.
In 1966, Masters and Johnson released their book
Human Sexual Response, in which they detailed the results of their studies. Although the book was written in
dry, clinical terms and intended for medical professionals, its titillating subject matter made it front-page news
and a runaway best seller, with over 300,000 volumes
distributed by 1970. While some reviewers accused the
team of dehumanizing and scientizing sex, overall professional and critical response was positive.

Develops sex therapy institute
At Johnson’s suggestion, the two researchers went
on the lecture circuit to discuss their findings and appeared on such television programs as NBC’s Today
show and ABC’s Stage ‘67. Their book and their public
appearances heightened public interest in sex therapy,
and a long list of clients developed. Couples referred to
their clinic would spend two weeks in intensive therapy
and have periodic follow-ups for five years. In a second
book, Human Sexual Inadequacy, published in 1970,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

345

Jukes family

Masters and Johnson discuss the possibility that sex
problems are more cultural than physiological or psychological. In 1975, they wrote The Pleasure Bond: A
New Look at Sexuality and Commitment, which differs
from previous volumes in that it was written for the average reader. This book describes total commitment and fidelity to the partner as the basis for an enduring sexual
bond. To expand counseling, Masters and Johnson
trained dual-sex therapy teams and conducted regular
workshops for college teachers, marriage counselors,
and other professionals.
After the release of this second book, Masters divorced his first wife and married Johnson on January 7,
1971, in Fayetteville, Arkansas. They continued their
work at the Reproductive Biology Research Foundation,
and in 1973 founded the Masters and Johnson Institute.
Johnson was co-director of the institute, running the
everyday business, and Masters concentrated on scientific work. Johnson, who never received a college degree,
was widely recognized along with Masters for her contributions to human sexuality research. Together they received several awards, including the Sex Education and
Therapists Award in 1978 and Biomedical Research
Award of the World Sexology Association in 1979.
In 1981, the team sold their lab and moved to another location in St. Louis, where they had a staff of 25 and
a long waiting list of clients. Their book Homosexuality
in Perspective, released shortly before the move, documents their research on gay and lesbian sexual practice
and homosexual sexual problems and their work with
“gender-confused” individuals who sought a “cure” for
their homosexuality. One of their most controversial
conclusions from their 10-year study of 84 men and
women was their conviction that homosexuality is primarily not physical, emotional, or genetic, but a learned
behavior. Some reviewers hailed the team’s claims of
success in “converting” homosexuals. Others, however,
observed that the handpicked individuals who participated in the study were not a representative sample; moreover, they challenged the team’s assumption that heterosexual performance alone was an accurate indicator of a
changed sexual preference.
The institute had many associates who assisted in
research and writing. Robert Kolodny, an M.D. interested in sexually transmitted diseases, coauthored the book
Crisis: Heterosexual Behavior in the Age of AIDS with
Masters and Johnson in 1988. The book, commented
Stephen Fried in Vanity Fair, “was politically incorrect in
the extreme”: it predicted a large-scale outbreak of the
virus in the heterosexual community and, in a chapter
meant to document how little was known of the AIDS
virus, suggested that it might be possible to catch it from
a toilet seat. Several prominent members of the medical
346

community questioned the study, and many accused the
authors of sowing hysteria. Adverse publicity hurt the
team, who were distressed because they felt the medical
community had turned against them. The number of
therapy clients at the institute declined.
The board of the institute was quietly dissolved and
William Young, Johnson’s son-in-law, became acting director. Johnson went into semi-retirement. On February
19, 1992, Young announced that after 21 years of marriage, Masters and Johnson were filing for divorce because of differences about goals relating to work and retirement. Following the divorce, Johnson took most of
the institute’s records with her and is continuing her
work independently.
Further Reading
Duberman, Martin Bauml. Review of “Homosexuality in perspective.” New Republic. (June 16, 1979): 24–31.
Fried, Stephen. “The new sexperts.” Vanity Fair. (December
1992): 132.
Masters, William Howell and Robert Kolodny. Masters and
Johnson on sex and human loving. Little, Brown, 1986.
“Repairing the conjugal bed.” Time. (March 25, 1970.)
Robinson, Paul. The modernization of sex: Havelock Ellis, Albert Kinsey, William Masters, and Virginia Johnson. Cornell University Press, 1988.

Jukes family
Pseudonym for the family involved in a psychological study of antisocial behavior.

One of the goals of 19th-century American scientists
was to determine why some people engaged in undesirable or antisocial behavior. A family from Ulster County in upstate New York provided a great deal of material
for speculation about the origins of such behavior. The
family was referred to as the Jukes family (the actual
family name was kept anonymous).
One of the initial researchers of the Jukes family
was Elisha Harris (1824-1884), a New York City physician. He identified a family that, for six generations, had
included large numbers of paupers, criminals, and vagrants. He traced the family to a woman he referred to as
“Margaret, mother of criminals.” Margaret and her two
sisters produced 600 descendants over an 85-year period,
many of whom lived on the fringes of society. For example, in one generation that produced 14 children, nine
served a total of 50 years in state prison, and the other
five were frequently jailed for petty crimes or spent time
in poorhouses.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Carl Jung

After Harris’s discovery, Richard Dugale (18411883) studied the family history intensively. He concluded that the repeated appearance of undesirable behaviors
could be traced to environmental rather than hereditary
factors. Dugale advocated for decent housing and education for people from damaging environments.
After Dugale’s death, some of his contemporaries
reinterpreted his research in light of hereditarian influences. Instead of advancing the idea that environment
influenced the behavior of the Jukes, the notion that antisocial behavior was passed from one generation to the
next like any other biological trait was favored. Proponents of this idea included the widely respected physician and author Oliver Wendell Holmes (1809-1894).
Holmes’s son later became a United States Supreme
Court Justice and issued a famous ruling that allowed
legal, involuntary sterilization of people deemed to be
genetically “unfit.”
Later research has revealed that the original settlers
in Ulster County, like the Jukes, included people who
could not adapt to the urban life in 19th-century New
York City and moved north, living an itinerant life of
trapping and hunting. (The name “Jukes” came from the
slang term “to juke,” which described the behavior of
chickens who did not deposit their eggs in nests, but
rather laid them in any convenient spot.) When the area
became more densely populated, such individuals lost
most of their hunting and trapping land and their way of
life. They were looked down upon by later settlers, who
preferred to live in houses within a community. The earlier inhabitants, including the Jukes, were forced to live a
marginal existence, which foreshadowed their troubles
with society.
See also Kallikak family; Nature-nurture controversy

Carl Jung
1875-1961
Swiss psychiatrist and founder of analytic psychology.

Carl Jung was born in Switzerland, the son of a
Swiss Reform pastor. Having decided to become a psychiatrist, he enrolled in medical school at the University
of Basel, from which he received his degree in 1900.
Serving as an assistant at the University of Zurich Psychiatric Clinic, Jung worked under psychiatrist Eugen
Bleuler (1857-1939), a psychiatrist renowned for his
work on schizophrenia. Jung also traveled to France to
study with the well-known psychiatrist Pierre Janet
(1859-1947) as well. In 1905, he was appointed to a fac-

Carl Jung (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

ulty position in psychiatry at the University of Zurich
and became a senior physician at its clinic. Eventually, a
growing private practice forced him to resign his university position. Jung’s early published studies on schizophrenia established his reputation, and he also won
recognition for developing a word association test.
Jung had read Sigmund Freud’s The Interpretation
of Dreams shortly after its publication in 1900 and entered into a correspondence with its author. The two men
met in 1907 and began a close association that was to last
for over six years. In 1909, they both traveled to the United States to participate in the 20th-anniversary commemoration at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts,
at the invitation of American psychologist, G. Stanley
Hall (1844-1924). Jung became part of a weekly discussion group that met at Freud’s house and included, among
others, Alfred Adler and Otto Rank (1884-1939). This
group evolved into the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society,
and Jung became its first president in 1911. Jung had
begun to develop concepts about psychoanalysis and the
nature of the unconscious that differed from those of
Freud, however, especially Freud’s insistence on the sexual basis of neurosis. After the publication of Jung’s Psychology of the Unconscious in 1912, the disagreement between the two men grew, and their relationship ended in

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

347

Just noticeable difference

1914. At this period, Jung underwent a period of personal
turmoil and, like Freud at a similar juncture in his own
life, undertook a thorough self-analysis based on his
dreams. Jung also explored myths and symbols, an interest he was to investigate further in the 1920s with trips to
Africa and the southwestern United States to study the
myths and religions of non-Western cultures.
Jung developed his own system of psychoanalysis,
which he called analytical psychology, that reflected his
interest in symbolism, mythology, and spirituality. A
major premise of analytical psychology is that the individual personality, or psyche, functions on three levels.
The ego operates at the conscious level, while the personal unconscious includes experiences that have been
repressed, forgotten, or kept from consciousness in some
other way. It is also the site of complexes—groups of
feelings, thoughts, and memories, usually organized
around a significant person (such as a parent) or object
(such as money). At the deepest and most powerful level,
Jung posited the existence of a racial or collective unconscious, which gathers together the experiences of previous generations and even animal ancestors, preserving
traces of humanity’s evolutionary development over
time. The collective unconscious is a repository of
shared images and symbols, called archetypes, that
emerge in dreams, myths, and other forms. These include such common themes as birth, rebirth, death, the
hero, the earth mother, and the demon. Certain archetypes form separate systems within the personality, including the persona, or public image; the anima and animus, or gender characteristics; the shadow, or animal instincts; and the self, which strives for unity and wholeness. In Jung’s view, a thorough analysis of both the
personal and collective unconscious is necessary to fully
understand the individual personality.
Perhaps Jung’s best-known contribution is his theory that individuals can be categorized according to general attitudinal type as either introverted (inward-looking) or extroverted (outward-looking). The psychic
wholeness, or individuation, for which human beings
strive depends on reconciling these tendencies as well as
the four functional aspects of the mind that are split into
opposing pairs: sensing versus intuiting as ways of
knowing, and thinking versus feeling as ways of evaluating. If any of these personality characteristics is overly
dominant in the conscious mind, its opposite will be exaggerated in the unconscious. These pairs of functions
have been widely adapted in vocational and other types
of testing.
From 1932 to 1942, Jung was a professor at the Federal Polytechnical University of Zurich. Although his
health forced him to resign, he continued writing about
analytical psychology for the rest of his life and promot348

ing the attainment of psychic wholeness through personal transformation and self-discovery. Jung’s work has
been influential in disciplines other than psychology, and
his own writing includes works on religion, the arts, literature, and occult topics including alchemy, astrology,
yoga, fortune telling, and flying saucers. Jung’s autobiography, Memories, Dreams, Reflections, was published
in 1961, the year of his death. Institutes of analytical
psychology have been established throughout the world,
although its international center remains the C.J. Jung
Institute in Zurich, founded in 1948. Jung was a prolific
writer; his collected works fill 19 volumes, but many of
his writings were not published in English until after
1965. Shortly before his death, Jung completed work on
Man and His Symbols, which has served as a popular introduction to his ideas on symbols and dreams.
See also Archetype; Character; Extroversion; Introversion
Further Reading
Fordham, Frieda. An Introduction to Jung’s Psychology. New
York: Penguin Books, 1966.

Just noticeable difference
Scientific calculation of the average detectable difference between two measurable qualities, such as
weight, brightness of light, loudness of sound.

When we try to compare two different objects to see
if they are the same or different on some dimension (e.g.,
weight), the difference between the two that is barely big
enough to be noticed is called the just noticeable difference (JND). Just noticeable differences have been studied for many dimensions (e.g., brightness of lights, loudness of sounds, weight, line length, and others).
The human sensory system does not respond identically to the same stimuli on different occasions. As a result, if an individual attempted to identify whether two
objects were of the same or different weight he or she
might detect a difference on one occasion but will fail to
notice it on another occasion. Psychologists calculate the
just noticeable difference as an average detectable difference across a large number of trials. The JND does not
stay the same when the magnitude of the stimuli change.
In assessing heaviness, for example, the difference between two stimuli of 10 and 11 grams could be detected,
but we would not be able to detect the difference between
100 and 101 grams. As the magnitude of the stimuli grow,
we need a larger actual difference for detection. The percentage of change remains constant in general. To detect
the difference in heaviness, one stimulus would have to

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Psychologists refer to the percentages that describe
the JND as Weber fractions, named after Ernst Weber
(1795-1878), a German physiologist whose pioneering
research on sensation had a great impact on psychological studies. For example, humans require a 4.8% change
in loudness to detect a change; a 7.9% change in brightness is necessary. These values will differ from one person to the next, and from one occasion to the next. However, they do represent generally accurate values.
Further Reading
Nietzel, Michael T. Introduction to Clinical Psychology. 3rd
ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991.

Juvenile delinquency
Chronic antisocial behavior by persons 18 years of
age or younger that is beyond parental control and
is often subjected to legal and punitive action.

According to the Federal Bureau of Investigation
(FBI) and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the arrest rate of American juveniles (persons 18 years of age
or younger) committing violent crimes increased from
137 percent in 1965 to 430 percent in 1990. While
teenagers are the population most likely to commit
crimes, their delinquency is related to the overall incidence of crime in society: teen crime increases as adult
crime does. The majority of violent teenage crime is
committed by males. While the same delinquency rates
are attributed to both whites and nonwhites, nonwhites
have a higher arrest rate.
In spite of the emotional turbulence associated with
adolescence, most teenagers find legal, nonviolent ways
to express feelings of anger and frustration and to establish self-esteem. Nonetheless, some teenagers turn to
criminal activity for these purposes and as a reaction to
peer pressure. A number of factors have been linked to
the rise in teen crime, including family violence. Parents
who physically or verbally abuse each other or their children are much more likely to raise children who will
commit crimes. In a study conducted in 1989, for example, 80 out of 95 incarcerated juvenile delinquents had
witnessed or been victims of severe family violence. A
similar incidence of abuse was found in a study of
teenage murderers.
The growing poverty rate in the U.S., particularly
among children, has also been attributed to juvenile
delinquency. In the late 1980s, the National Education

Association predicted that 40 percent of secondary school
students will live below the poverty line. The anger and
frustration of low-income youths excluded from the
“good life” depicted in the mass media, coupled with the
lack of visible opportunities to carve out productive paths
for themselves, lead many to crime, much of it drug-related. A dramatic link has been found between drug use and
criminal activity: people who abuse illegal drugs, such as
cocaine and heroin, have been found to commit six times
as many crimes as non-drug users.
For many poor inner-city youths, juvenile delinquency begins with participation in the drug trade. Children as young as 9 or 10 are paid as much as $100 a day
to serve as lookouts while drug deals are taking place.
Next, they become runners and may eventually graduate
to being dealers. The introduction of crack cocaine, one
of the most powerfully addictive drugs in existence, in
the mid-1980s, has contributed to drug-related delinquency. The neglected children of crack-addicted parents
are especially likely to be pulled into the drug culture
themselves.
The wealth gained from the drug trade has further
escalated levels of juvenile delinquency by fueling the
rise of violent street gangs. Many gangs are highly organized operations with formal hierarchies and strict codes
of dress and behavior. With millions of dollars in drug
money behind them, they are expanding from major
urban areas to smaller communities. Teens, both poor
and middle-class, join gangs for status, respect, and a
feeling of belonging denied them in other areas of their
lives. Some are pressured into joining to avoid harassment from gang members. Once in a gang, teens are
much more likely to be involved in violent acts.
The juvenile justice system has been criticized as
outdated and ineffective in dealing with the volume and
nature of today’s teen crime. A teenager must be either 16
or 18 years of age (depending on the state) to be tried as
an adult in criminal court, regardless of the crime committed. Child offenders under the age of 13 are considered juvenile delinquents and can only be tried in family
court, no matter what type of crime they have committed.
Unless the offender has already committed two serious
crimes, the maximum punishment is 18 months in a
youth facility. Teenagers between the ages of 13 and 16
are classified as “juvenile offenders.” They are rarely
photographed or fingerprinted, even in cases involving
rape or murder, and usually receive lenient sentences.
Most are confined for period of less than four months.
Of approximately 2 million juveniles arrested each
year, an estimated 50 percent are released immediately.
Those whose cases are tried in court are often given suspended sentences or put on probation. Of those who are

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

349

Juvenile delinquency

be approximately 2 percent heavier than the other; otherwise, we will not be able to spot the difference.

Juvinile delinquency

sentenced to prison, most return to criminal activity upon
their release, and many fear that these young offenders
come out of prisons even more violent. In addition, the
unmanageable caseloads of probation officers in many
cities makes it impossible to keep track of juveniles adequately. Thus, those teens who turn to crime face little in
the way of a deterrent, a situation that has caused many
authorities to place a large share of the blame for teen
crime on the failure of the juvenile justice system.
Alternative community-based programs for all but
the most violent teens have had some success in reducing juvenile crime. These include group homes which

350

offer counseling and education; wilderness programs
such as Outward Bound; crisis counseling programs that
provide emergency aid to teenagers and their families;
and placement in a foster home, when a stable home environment is lacking.
Further Reading
Binder, Arnold. Juvenile Delinquency: Historical, Cultural,
Legal Perspectives. New York: Macmillan, 1988.
Grinney, Ellen Heath. Delinquency and Criminal Behavior.
New York: Chelsea House Publishers, 1992.
Trojanowicz, Robert C. Juvenile Delinquency: Concepts and
Control. New York: Prentice Hall, 1983.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

K
Jerome Kagan
1929American psychologist who has studied the role of
physiology in psychological development.

Jerome Kagan is one of the major developmental biologists of the twentieth century. He has been a pioneer
in re-introducing physiology as a determinate of psychological characteristics. The Daniel and Amy Starch Professor of Psychology at Harvard University, Kagan has
won numerous awards, including the Hofheimer Prize of
the American Psychiatric Association (1963) and the
G. Stanley Hall Award of the American Psychological
Association (APA) in 1994. He has served on numerous
committees of the National Academy of Sciences, as
well as the President’s Science Advisory Committee and
the Social Science Research Council.
Kagan was born in Newark, New Jersey in 1929,
the son of Joseph and Myrtle (Liebermann) Kagan.
His father was a businessman. Kagan graduated from
Rutgers University in New Jersey in 1950 with a B.S.
degree. In 1951 he married Cele Katzman; the couple
have one daughter. Kagan earned his master’s degree
from Harvard University and his Ph.D. from Yale University in 1954 and spent one year as an instructor in
psychology at Ohio State University. Following two
years as a psychologist at the U.S. Army Hospital at
West Point, Kagan joined the Fels Research Institute
in Yellow Springs, Ohio, as a research associate. In
1959, he became chairman of the Department of Psychology there.
Since the late 1920s, scientists at Fels had been
studying middle-class children from infancy through
adolescence in order to better understand human development. At that time, most psychologists believed
that personal characteristics were determined by environmental factors rather than by inheritance. Kagan’s
early research at Fels focused on the degree to which
individual personality traits carried through from in-

fancy and childhood to adolescence and beyond. On
re-examining some of the Fels subjects as adults,
Kagan and Howard Moss did not find strong support
for the maintenance of behavioral characteristics such
as aggression, dominance, competitiveness, and dependence. However, they found that a small group who
had been very fearful as toddlers had retained aspects
of this “behavioral inhibition” as adults. In 1962,
Kagan and Moss published their landmark book Birth
to Maturity.

Questions environmental determinism
In 1964, Kagan moved to Harvard University. After
spending a year doing fieldwork in a small native
Guatemalan village, he began to examine the influence
of biological factors on development and developmental variation in children. Kagan discovered that the development of memory skills, the understanding of
symbolism, a sense of morality, and self-awareness
arise in a particular order during the first two years of
life. He concluded that children are very adaptable and
that their biology promotes a regular developmental
progression even under unfavorable circumstances. In
1984 he published The Nature of the Child, which he
revised in 1994. In this book, Kagan argued that biology and environment both were important factors in development, and he questioned the widespread belief
that adult personality was determined by childhood experience alone.
Since 1979, Kagan and his coworkers have studied
inhibited versus uninhibited temperaments among infants and children, particularly in response to unfamiliar
situations. A temperament is a relatively stable, emotional or behavioral trait that first appears during childhood. They found that about 20% of healthy four-monthold infants reacted to stimulation with thrashing and distress. About two-thirds of these infants became inhibited
children who exhibited strong physiological responses to
stress. He has concluded that there are biological differ-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

351

Kallikak family

ences in the excitability of individual neurochemical systems. He suggests that children with very excitable systems tend to be timid, anxious, and inhibited, and those
with less excitable systems tend to the opposite. These
two types of individuals correspond to the “melancholic”
and “sanguine” temperaments, first described by the ancient Greek physician Hippocrates. Likewise, they correspond to the introvert and the extrovert described by
Carl Jung. In the second century A.D., the Roman physician Galen argued that these temperaments were determined by a combination of biological inheritance and
environmental factors. Kagan’s research suggests that
Galen was correct. Kagan published Unstable Ideas:
Temperament, Cognition, and Self in 1989.

Questions continuity of development and
parental influences
In his book Three Seductive Ideas (1998), Kagan argued against “infant determinism,” the widespread belief
that experiences and parenting during the first three
years of a child’s life are the most important determinants of adult personality. To Kagan, this assumption is
unproven, and perhaps unprovable. He also argued
against the common belief that development is a continuous process from infancy to adulthood. Rather, he believes that it is discontinuous process.
Kagan’s many writings include Understanding Children: Behavior, Motives, and Thought (1971), Growth of
the Child (1978), The Second Year: The Emergence of
Self-Awareness (1981), and a number of cross-cultural
studies of child development. He has coauthored numerous editions of a widely used introductory psychology text. In 1982, he was awarded the Wilbur Lucius
Cross Medal from Yale University. He also is a recipient
of the APA’s Distinguished Scientist Award. Kagan is on
the editorial board of the journals Child Development
and Developmental Psychology, and is active in numerous professional organizations.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
“Galen’s prophecy: temperament and human nature” (book review). The Economist (U.S.) 332 (23 July 1994): 85-6.
Hulbert, Ann. “Parents, peers, and the rearing of children: the influence of anxiety.” The New Republic 7 December 1998.
Kagan, Jerome. Galen’s prophecy: temperament in human nature. New York: Basic Books, 1994.
Kagan, Jerome. “A parent’s influence is peerless.” Harvard Education Letter November/December 1998.
http://www.edletter.org/past/issues/1998-nd/parents.shtml
(March/April 2000).
352

Kallikak family
Pseudonym for a family involved in a psychological study of the hereditary aspects of intelligence.

The history of intelligence testing in the United
States has been troublesome from the beginning. Although psychologists attempted to conduct legitimate research and apply psychological knowledge to the study
of intelligence, some of the early work was quite unscientific and led to dubious results.
One case involved the descendants of an anonymous
man referred to as Martin Kallikak. This man produced
two different lines of descent, one with a supposedly
“feebleminded” bar maid with whom he had had sexual
relations and one with his wife, reputed to be an honest
Quaker woman. The offsprings from the two women
generated two lineages that could not have been more
different. The pseudonym “Kallikak” was taken from
two Greek words: kallos, meaning beauty (referring to
the descendants of the Quaker woman) and kakos, meaning bad (referring to the descendants of the bar maid).
The psychologist Henry Goddard (1866-1957) investigated these two groups over a two-year period. According to psychology historian David Hothersall, Goddard
discovered that the inferior branch of Martin Kallikak’s
family included “46 normal people, 143 who were definitely feebleminded, 36 illegitimate births, 33 sexually
immoral people, 3 epileptics, and 24 alcoholics. These
people were horse thieves, paupers, convicts, prostitutes,
criminals, and keepers of houses of ill repute. On the other
hand, Quaker side of the family included only 3 somewhat
mentally “degenerate people, 2 alcoholics, 1 sexually
loose person, and no illegitimate births or epileptics.”
These patterns of behavior were believed to be the
results of heredity, rather than environment, even
though the two environments were radically different.
Goddard also believed that intelligence was determined
by heredity, just like the inclination toward prostitution,
theft, and poverty.
Goddard was also a supporter of the eugenics movement in the United States. One of the solutions that he
proposed for controlling the creation of the “defective
classes” was sterilization, which he advocated as being
as simple as having a tooth extracted. Later in his career,
Goddard retracted some of his earlier conclusions and
maintained that, although intelligence had a hereditary
basis, morons (at that time a technical term) might beget
other morons, but they could be educated and made useful to society.
See also Jukes family; Nature-nurture controversy

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Goddard, Henry Herbert. The Kallikak Family: A Study in the
Heredity of Feeble-Mindedness. New York: Macmillan,
1927.
Gould, S. J. The Mismeasure of Man. New York: W. W. Norton, 1981.

George Alexander Kelly
1905-1967
American psychologist best known for developing
the psychology of personal constructs.

George Alexander Kelly, originator of personal
construct theory of personality, was born on farm near
Perth Kansas. He was the only child of Elfleda Merriam
Kelly and Theodore Vincent Kelly. Kelly’s father trained
for the Presbyterian ministry but gave that up and
moved to the farm soon after wedding Kelly’s mother.
When Kelly was four, his family moved to Eastern Colorado to make a claim on land given to settlers for free
by the U. S. government. Because no water could be located beneath the land, the family moved back to the
Kansas farm.
Kelly’s early schooling was, by his own words,
“rather irregular.” He attended various grade schools and
was also schooled at home, an obligation his parents
took seriously as they were themselves relatively well
educated. After age 13 he was sent away to school and
attended four different high schools. When he was 16 he
transferred to Friends University academy in Wichita,
Kansas. There he took a mix of college and academy
courses. He then transferred to Park College, Missouri,
where he graduated in 1926 with a bachelor’s degree in
mathematics and physics. During these years he became
involved in his college debate team, and was seen as an
excellent speaker.
He had planned on going into engineering after
college, but his success at debating, and the fact that it
provoked his interest in social issues, made him wonder about the real value of an engineering career. Thus,
the following fall he entered the educational sociology
program of the University of Kansas with minors in
sociology and labor relations. In the fall of 1927, with
his master’s thesis (a study of how Kansas City workers distributed their leisure time activities) incomplete,
he moved to Minneapolis. He had sent out many applications for teaching jobs with no success. There he
taught three nights a week, one night each for three
different schools. He enrolled in the University of
Minnesota in biometrics and sociology but was forced
to leave after a few weeks, when the school found out

he had to been able to pay his fees. He finished his
master’s thesis in 1927.
In the winter of 1927 Kelly got a job at Sheldon Junior College in Sheldon, Iowa, teaching psychology and
speech, and coaching drama. He spent one and a half
years there. He then spent a summer at the University of
Minnesota, and some months in Wichita, Kansas as an
aeronautical engineer for an aircraft company. He then
went to the University of Edinburgh, Scotland as an exchange student, where he received his Bachelor’s in Education in 1930. He then enrolled in the University of
Iowa and received his Ph.D. in psychology in 1931. His
doctoral dissertation was on common factors in reading
and speech disabilities.
He married Gladys Thompson just two days after attaining his Ph.D. In 1931, Kelly accepted a faculty position at Fort Hays Kansas State College (now called Fort
Hays State University) where he was to remain for 12
years. He had wanted to pursue work in physiological
psychology but found little opportunity to do so. So he
turned his attention to an area he felt needed some
work—providing clinical psychological services to
adults and school-aged children on the university’s campus. These services included counseling (vocational and
academic), academic skill development, psychotherapy,
and speech therapy.
Eventually, there was a demand for these services
beyond campus, and Kelly developed a program for a
clinic that traveled to schools in rural Kansas, there providing diagnostic formulations and treatment recommendations for students, typically twelve per day. At this
time the United States was in the grips of a severe economic depression and the Midwest had experienced a
major drought. Economic devastation was commonplace
and many families were distressed. Kelly and his crew of
four to five undergraduate and graduate students found
people who had serious problems in their daily living.
The need for these services was so strong and publicly
recognized that the state legislature funded the traveling
clinic directly through a legislative act.
He found that Freudian approaches to psychological problems worked to help some of the people he saw,
but that his own formulations also worked if they were
relevant to the person’s problem and provided the person with a different way of looking at the problem. In
these constructions one can see the seeds of Kelly’s constructive alternativism. In his view, different people
have alternative ways of looking at the world, and each
view can capture some element of truth. None are right
or wrong, all views are constructed by the individuals
and reflect reality for them. In a way, people construct
their own reality.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

353

George Alexander Kelly

Further Reading

Kinesthetic sense

Shortly after World War II started, Kelly entered the
U. S. Navy in the aviation psychology division, where he
and fellow psychologists worked on ways of choosing
the best naval air cadets. After the war ended Kelly
taught at the University of Maryland for a year before
being appointed a professorship at Ohio State University
in 1945. In 1946 he became director of the clinical psychology program where he remained until 1965. Kelly
served as president of both the Consulting (1954-1955)
and Clinical (1956-1957) divisions of the American Psychological Association. In 1965 he took the position of
Distinguished Professorial Chair in Theoretical Psychology at Brandeis University, which he held until his sudden death in 1967.
Kelly’s personal construct theory of personality is
perhaps his most significant contribution to psychology.
It is a broad theory based on the idea that people are like
scientists who go around testing personal theories, or
personal constructs, about the world and how it works,
and about themselves. Behavior is seen as an experiment. Individuals use these constructs in an attempt to
anticipate events and exert control over their lives. He
believed that people tend to have certain main personal
constructs about large areas of life that guide their behavior. These constructs or concepts can be revised in
the face of conflicting information, or they can become
stable and internalized as basic personality tendencies.
Kelly laid out the theory in his 1955 two-volume book
entitled The Psychology of Personal Constructs. Kelly
also developed the Role Construct Repertory Test, a
method of assessing how an individual sees his or her
world or personal-role constructs. In addition, Kelly experimented with fixed-role therapy, in which a client
would “try on” various roles.
Personal construct theory was internationally recognized as a unique theoretical contribution to psychology.
Indeed, his work has enjoyed more popularity in Britain
than anywhere else. Hundreds of scholarly papers have
been published that have personal constructs as their
theme. Personal construct methods and ideas have been
used to study numerous and varied topics, such as relationship development and breakdown, vocational decision making, psychopathology, education, and cognitive
complexity. Since his death in 1967, interest in Kelly’s
work has grown, and its influence has become even
stronger. Since 1975, biennial International Congresses
on Personal Construct Psychology have been held, and
on alternate years regional conferences are held. The International Journal of Personal Construct Psychology
was founded in 1988, changing its title and focus in 1994
to the Journal of Constructivist Psychology.
Marie Doorey
354

Further Reading
Fransella, Fay. George Kelly London: Sage Publications, 1995.
Kelly, George A. The Psychology of Personal Constructs. London: Routledge, 1991 (originally published in 1955).
Neimeyer, Robert A. “Kelly, George Alexander,” In 2000 Encyclopedia of Psychology, V.4. Alan E. Kazdin, ed. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association & New
York: Oxford University Press, Inc., 2000.
Peyser, C.S. “Kelly, George A.” In Encyclopedia of Psychology, 2nd Ed., V. 4. R.J. Corsini, Editor. NY: John Wiley &
Sons, 1994.

Kinesthetic sense
The ability to know accurately the positions and
movements of one’s skeletal joints.

Kinesthesis refers to sensory input that occurs within the body. Postural and movement information are
communicated via sensory systems by tension and compression of muscles in the body. Even when the body remains stationary, the kinesthetic sense can monitor its
position. Humans possess three specialized types of neurons responsive to touch and stretching that help keep
track of body movement and position. The first class,
called Pacinian corpuscles, lies in the deep subcutaneous
fatty tissue and responds to pressure. The second class of
neurons surrounds the internal organs, and the third class
is associated with muscles, tendons, and joints. These
neurons work in concert with one another and with cortical neurons as the body moves.
The ability to assess the weight of an object is another function of kinesthesia. When an individual picks
up an object, the tension in his/her muscles generates
signals that are used to adjust posture. This sense does
not operate in isolation from other senses. For example,
the size-weight illusion results in a mismatch between
how heavy an object looks and how heavy the muscles
“think” it should be. In general, larger objects are judged
as being heavier than smaller objects of the same weight.
The kinesthetic sense does not mediate equilibrium,
or sense of balance. Balance involves different sensory
pathways and originates in large part within the inner ear.
Further Reading
Bartenieff, Irmgard. Body Movement: Coping with the Environment. New York: Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, 1980.
Moving Parts (videorecording). Princeton, NJ: Films for the
Humanities, 1985.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Alfred Charles Kinsey

Alfred Charles Kinsey
1894-1956
American entomologist and sex researcher who pioneered the study of human sexuality.

Alfred Charles Kinsey was a well-known entomologist, specializing in the study of gall wasps, when his increasing interest in human sexuality led him in a entirely
new scientific direction. Appalled by the lack of reliable
scientific information on human sexual practices and
problems, Kinsey began conducting extensive interviews, first with his students and then with larger populations. Kinsey’s landmark studies, which emphasized
both the variety of human sexual activities and the prevalence of practices that were condemned by society, led to
a new openness in attitudes toward sex. His work was
part of trend in which laws were liberalized and sex education for children became commonplace. Kinsey’s research revived interest in the science of “sexology.”
Born in 1894, in Hoboken, New Jersey, Kinsey was
the son of a domineering father, Alfred Seguine Kinsey,
and a devoutly religious mother, Sarah Anne (Charles)
Kinsey. In 1904, the family, including a younger brother
and sister, moved to the more fashionable town of South
Orange, New Jersey. Childhood illnesses and a misdiagnosis of heart disease kept Kinsey out of sports, but his
life-long interests in classical music and field biology
developed at an early age. He became an avid outdoorsman, was active in the Boy Scouts, and spent summers
as a camp counselor. Although he dreamed of becoming
a biologist—his high school yearbook predicted that he
would become “the second Darwin”—his father, who
had worked his way up from shop boy to shop instructor
at the Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, demanded that Kinsey study engineering at Stevens.

Breaks with father to become an
entomologist
Almost overnight, Kinsey went from high school
valedictorian to a mediocre student at a technical college. After two years at Stevens, Kinsey announced to
his father that he was transferring to Bowdoin College in
Brunswick, Maine. Financing his education with his
summer earnings and aid from a wealthy South Orange
widow, Kinsey became the star biology student at Bowdoin, while maintaining his involvement with the local
church and the YMCA. Graduating magna cum laude in
1916, Kinsey received a fellowship to Harvard University. He began studying gall wasps at the Bussey Institute
under William Morton Wheeler. These tiny insects, that
form galls, or growths, on roses and oaks, were the per-

Alfred Kinsey (The Library of Congress. Reproduced by
permission.)

fect subject for Kinsey’s unwavering attention to detail
and his love of collecting large samples in the wild.
While at Harvard, Kinsey found time to write a botanical
work, Edible Wild Plants of Eastern North America, although the book was not published until 1942. After
earning his doctor of science in 1919, a Sheldon Travelling Fellowship enabled Kinsey to tramp across the
country for a year, collecting gall wasps.
Settling into the life of a college professor at Indiana
University in Bloomington, Kinsey married Clara
Brachen McMillen in 1921. She was a chemistry student
who shared his love of music and the outdoors. Over the
next few years, the couple had four children, although
the oldest died of diabetes before the age of four. The
publication of Kinsey’s texts, An Introduction to Biology
(1926) and Field and Laboratory Manual in Biology
(1927), provided the family with financial security. His
books on gall wasps, published in the 1930s, established
him as both the leading expert on these insects and an
important theorist in genetics.

Studies on human sexuality bring fame and
notoriety
Kinsey’s interests were starting to turn from wasps
to people. Disturbed by the lack of scientific knowledge

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

355

Kleptomania

concerning human sexuality, as well as the profound ignorance of his students concerning sexual matters, in
1938 Kinsey began teaching a course on marriage. The
Indiana students, anxious for accurate information,
flocked to the course and Kinsey turned them into his
initial subjects. First with questionnaires and later with
private interviews, Kinsey obtained detailed sexual histories of his students and counseled them on the most
intimate matters. Soon, using his own funds to expand
his research, Kinsey was interviewing large numbers of
subjects in Chicago, analyzing data, and training collaborators. With funding from the National Research Council’s Committee on the Research in Problems of Sex and
the Rockefeller Foundation, he founded the Institute for
Sex Research at Indiana University. In 1984 it was renamed the Kinsey Institute for Research in Sex, Gender,
and Reproduction.
With the publication of his best-selling book, Sexual Behavior in the Human Male in 1948, Kinsey became an icon of popular culture. In language reminiscent of his high school yearbook, the popular press referred to Kinsey as the successor to Darwin. “The Kinsey Report,” as it became known, used straightforward
and accurate language to report the findings from thousands of interviews: most males, especially teenagers,
masturbated frequently without going insane; premarital and extramarital sex were common; and one-third
of all men reported having had at least one homosexual
experience. Predictably, Kinsey’s book was attacked
by religious and conservative groups. With the publication of Sexual Behavior in the Human Female in
1953, the outcry increased and the Rockefeller Foundation withdrew their support. Kinsey’s studies on
women’s sexuality included frank and detailed discussions of female sexual response and orgasm and further reports of frequent masturbation and premarital
and extramarital sex. Kinsey was accused of undermining the morals of America.
Unable to obtain funding for a new large-scale study
of sex offenders, Kinsey traveled to Europe and England
in 1955. There he lectured and studied sexual attitudes.
Despite increasingly poor health, he completed his
7,935th interview in Chicago in the spring of 1956. Ill
with pneumonia and a heart condition, Kinsey fell and
bruised himself in his garden. The bruise produced a
fatal embolism, and he died in a Bloomington hospital in
August, 1956, at the age of 62. Although both Alfred
Kinsey and “The Kinsey Report” remain controversial,
and later researchers have raised serious questions about
Kinsey’s methodologies, his work had a profound impact
on sexual attitudes and beliefs.
Margaret Alic
356

Further Reading
Christenson, Cornelia V. Kinsey: A Biography. Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1971.
Epstein, Joseph. “The secret life of Alfred Kinsey.” Commentary 195 (January 1998): 35-39.
Gathorne-Hardy, Jonathan. Alfred C. Kinsey: Sex the Measure of
all Things. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2000.
Jones, James H. Alfred C. Kinsey: A Public/Private Life. New
York: W. W. Norton & Co., 1997.
Pomeroy, Wardell Baxter. Dr. Kinsey and the Institute for Sex
Research. New York: Harper & Row, 1972.

Kleptomania
One of the impulse control disorders, characterized by an overwhelming impulse to steal.

Persons with this disorder, popularly referred to as
kleptomaniacs, experience a recurring urge to steal that
they are unable to resist. They do not steal for the value of
the item, for its use, or because they cannot afford the purchase. The individual knows that it is wrong to steal.
Stolen items are often thrown or given away, secretly returned to the store from which they were taken, or hidden.
Persons with this disorder describe a feeling of tension prior to committing the theft, and a feeling of relief
or pleasure while stealing the item.
Kleptomania is a rare disorder. It can begin at any
age, and is reported to be more common among females.
Kleptomania is different from deliberate theft or
shoplifting, which is much more common; it is estimated
that less than 5 percent of individuals who shoplift exhibit symptoms of kleptomania. Shoplifting often involves two or more individuals working together; among
adolescents, peers sometimes challenge or dare each
other to commit an act of shoplifting. Individuals with
kleptomania are not influenced by peers, nor are they
motivated by a need for the item stolen. This disorder
may persist despite arrests for shoplifting; the individual
is apparently not deterred by the consequences of stealing, but may feel guilty afterwards.
Further Reading
Morrison, James. DSM-IV Made Easy: The Clinician’s Guide
to Diagnosis. New York: The Guilford Press, 1995.

Kurt Koffka
1886-1941
German-American experimental psychologist and
a founder of the Gestalt movement.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Kurt Koffka

Working with Max Wertheimer and Wolfgang
Köhler, Kurt Koffka helped establish the theories of
Gestalt psychology. It was Koffka who promoted this
new psychology in Europe and introduced it to the United States. He was responsible for systematizing Gestalt
psychology into a coherent body of theories. He extended Gestalt theories to developmental psychology, and
his ideas about perception, interpretation, and learning
influenced American educational theories and policies.
The son of Emil Koffka, a lawyer and royal councilor of law, and Luise Levi (or Levy), Koffka was born
in Berlin, Germany, in 1886. His early education was in
the hands of an English-speaking governess, and his
mother’s brother, a biologist, fostered his early interests
in philosophy and science. After attending the Wilhelms
Gymnasium and passing his exams, Koffka studied at the
University of Berlin with the philosopher Alois Riehl. In
1904-1905, Koffka studied at the University of Edinburgh in Scotland, improving his English and becoming
acquainted with British scientists and scholars. Upon returning to Berlin, he changed his studies from philosophy to psychology.
Koffka’s first published research, an examination of
his own color blindness, was carried out in the physiology laboratory of Wilibald Nagel. Koffka completed his
doctoral research at Berlin, on the perception of musical
and visual rhythms, under Carl Stumpf, one of the major
experimental psychologists of the time.

Cofounds Gestalt psychology
Koffka moved to the University of Freiburg in 1909,
as assistant to the physiologist Johannes von Kries, a professor on the medical faculty. Shortly thereafter, he became
an assistant to Oswald Külpe and Karl Marbe at the University of Würzburg, a major center of experimental psychology. That same year, Koffka married Mira Klein, who
had been an experimental subject for his doctoral research.
It was Koffka’s next move, in 1910, that was to prove the
most fateful for his career. Koffka and Köhler both went to
work as assistants to Friedrich Schumann at the Psychological Institute in Frankfurt am Main. They shared a laboratory with Wertheimer, who was studying the perception
of motion. Soon, Wertheimer, Koffka, and Köhler were establishing the theoretical and experimental basis of Gestalt
psychology. Their new approach rejected the mechanistic
psychology of the nineteenth century, which had attempted
to reduce experience and perception into smaller components or sensations. Instead, they favored a holistic approach to perception. Wertheimer had studied with the phenomenologist Christian von Ehrenfels, and the three scientists tried to combine this philosophy with experimental
methods. Koffka left to take a position as lecturer at the

Kurt Koffka (Archives of the History of American Psychology.
Reproduced with permission.)

University of Giessen in 1911, where he continued his experimental research on visual perception and began new
studies on memory and thinking. However he maintained
his close association with Wertheimer and Köhler.
In 1914, Koffka began studying hearing impairments in brain-damaged patients, with Robert Sommer,
the director of the Psychiatric Clinic at Giessen. During
the First World War, he also worked for the military on
localization of sound. Koffka was promoted to a professorship in experimental psychology in 1918, a position
that increased his teaching responsibilities but not his
salary. In 1921, when he became director of the Psychology Institute at Giessen, he was forced to raise his own
funds to set up his new laboratory. Nevertheless, Koffka
and his students published numerous experimental studies over the next few years, including 18 publications in
the Gestalt journal founded and edited by Wertheimer,
Köhler, and Koffka.

Applies Gestalt principles to child
development
Koffka’s major work extending Gestalt theory to developmental psychology was published in 1921. He
maintained that infants first perceive and respond holisti-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

357

Lawrence Kohlberg

cally. Only later are they able to perceive the individual
sensations that comprise the whole. Soon, Koffka was
being invited to lecture in the United States, where his
ideas were well received by psychologists. In 1922, he
published his first English-language paper, on Gestalt
theories of perception, in Psychological Bulletin. Robert
Ogden, the editor of the Bulletin, translated Koffka’s
work on developmental psychology, and it was published
in 1924 as The Growth of the Mind: An Introduction to
Child Psychology. Translated into numerous languages,
this work had a major influence on theories of learning
and development. In 1923, Koffka divorced his wife and
married Elisabeth Ahlgrimm, who had just finished her
Ph.D. at Giessen. However, they were divorced in the
same year and he remarried his first wife.
Gestalt psychology was strongly opposed by the traditional psychologists of German academia, and Koffka,
as the public advocate for Gestalt, encountered many obstacles to advancement in Germany. Therefore, he spent
1924-1925 as a visiting professor at Cornell University
and 1926-1927 at the University of Wisconsin. In 1927,
Koffka was offered a five-year appointment as the William
Allan Neilson Research Professor at Smith College in
Northampton, Massachusetts. The non-teaching position
included an equipped and funded laboratory staffed with
assistants. He continued his research on visual perception,
and his results were published in the four-volume Smith
College Studies in Psychology (1930-1933), as well as in
the German Gestalt journal that he continued to edit. Koffka remained a professor of psychology at Smith until his
death. In 1928, he was divorced again and he remarried
his second wife, Ahlgrimm.
Koffka undertook a research expedition to Uzbekistan in 1932, with funding from the Soviet Union. However an attack of relapsing fever, an infection transmitted
by lice and ticks, forced him to return home. On the way
back, he began writing his classic contribution to psychology, Principles of Gestalt Psychology, published in
1935. Drawing on his lifetime of experiments, he extended Gestalt theory to many areas of psychology, including
memory and learning. In his later lectures and writings,
Koffka applied Gestalt principles to a wide range of political, ethical, social, and artistic subjects. In 1939, as a visiting professor at Oxford, he worked with brain-damaged
patients at the Military Hospital for Head Injuries. There,
he developed the widely adopted evaluation methods for
such patients. Although heart disease began to restrict his
activities, Koffka continued teaching at Smith until a few
days before his death in 1941 from coronary thrombosis.
See also Gestalt principles of organization
Margaret Alic
358

Further Reading
Garraty, John A. and Mark C. Carnes. “Koffka, Kurt.” In American National Biography, edited by John A. Garraty and
Mark C. Carnes, vol. 12, pp. 861-63. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1999.
Henle, Mary. “Koffka, Kurt.” In Thinkers of the Twentieth Century: A Biographical, Bibliographical and Critical Dictionary, edited by Elizabeth Devine, Michael Held, James
Vinson, and George Walsh, pp. 298. Detroit: Gale Research, 1983.
Wesley, Frank. “Koffka, Kurt.” In Biographical Dictionary of
Psychology, edited by Noel Sheehy, Antony J. Chapman,
and Wendy A. Conroy, pp. 329-30. London: Routledge,
1997.

Lawrence Kohlberg
1927-1987
American psychologist whose work centered in the
area of the development of moral reasoning.

Lawrence Kohlberg was born in Bronxville, New
York, and received his B.A. (1948) and Ph.D. (1958)
from the University of Chicago. He served as an assistant professor at Yale University from 1959 to 1961 and
was a fellow of the Center of Advanced Study of Behavioral Science in 1962. Kohlberg began teaching at the
University of Chicago in 1963, where he remained until
his 1967 appointment to the faculty of Harvard University, where he has served as professor of education and social psychology. Kohlberg is best known for his work in
the development of moral reasoning in children and adolescents. Seeking to expand on Jean Piaget’s work in
cognitive development and to determine whether there
are universal stages in moral development as well,
Kohlberg conducted a long-term study in which he
recorded the responses of boys aged seven through adolescence to hypothetical dilemmas requiring a moral
choice. (The most famous sample question is whether
the husband of a critically ill woman is justified in stealing a drug that could save her life if the pharmacist is
charging much more than he can afford to pay.) Based on
the results of his study, Kohlberg concluded that children
and adults progress through six stages in the development of moral reasoning. He also concluded that moral
development is directly related to cognitive development, with older children able to base their responses on
increasingly broad and abstract ethical standards.
In evaluating his research, Kohlberg was primarily
interested not in the children’s responses themselves, but
in the reasoning behind them. Based on their thought
processes, he discerned a gradual evolution from self-interest to principled behavior and developed a chronologi-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

During adolescence, children move beyond this
level and become capable of postconventional morality,
which requires the ability to formulate abstract moral
principles, which are then obeyed to avoid self-condemnation rather than the censure of others. At Stage 5, adolescents are guided by a “social contract” orientation toward the welfare of the community, the rights of others,
and existing laws. At Stage 6, their actions are guided by
ethical standards that transcend the actual laws of their
society and are based on such abstract concepts as freedom, dignity, and justice. However, Kohlberg’s scheme
does not imply that all adolescents negotiate the passage
to postconventional morality. Progress through the different stages depends upon the type of thinking that a
child or adolescent is capable of at a given point, and
also on the negotiation of previous stages. Kohlberg
points out that many people never pass beyond the conventional level, and that the most clearly principled response at Stage 6 was expressed by fewer than 10 percent of adolescents over the age of 16. (In relation to the
dilemma of the stolen drug, such a response would clearly articulate the existence of a moral law that transcends
society’s laws about stealing, and the sanctity of human
life over financial gain.)

Kohlberg, progress from one level or stage to the next
involves an internal cognitive reorganization that is
more complex than a mere acquisition of precepts from
peers, parents, and other authorities. Kohlberg’s most
famous book is The Philosophy of Moral Development:
Moral Stages and the Idea of Justice, the first volume in
a series entitled Essays on Moral Development. The second volume, The Psychology of Moral Development,
was published in 1984.
See also Cognitive development
Further Reading
Alper, Joseph. “The Roots of Morality,” Science 85, (March
1985): 70.
Kohlberg, Lawrence. Child Psychology and Childhood Education: A Cognitive-Developmental View. New York: Longman, 1987.
Power, F. Clark. Lawrence Kohlberg’s Approach to Moral Education. New York: Columbia University Press, 1989.

Kohs block test
Intelligence test.

The Kohs block test, or Kohs block design test, is a
cognitive test for children or adults with a mental age between 3 and 19. It is mainly used to test persons with language or hearing handicaps but also given to disadvantaged and non-English-speaking children. The child is
shown 17 cards with a variety of colored designs and
asked to reproduce them using a set of colored blocks.
Performance is based not just on the accuracy of the
drawings but also on the examiner’s observation of the
child’s behavior during the test, including such factors as
attention level, self-criticism, and adaptive behavior
(such as self-help, communication, and social skills). The
Kohs block test is sometimes included in other tests, such
as the Merrill-Palmer and Arthur Performance scales.
Further Reading
McCullough, Virginia. Testing and Your Child: What You Should
Know About 150 of the Most Common Medical, Educational, and Psychological Tests. New York: Plume, 1992.
Walsh, W. Bruce, and Nancy E. Betz. Tests and Assessment.
2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990.

Kohlberg’s system is closely related to Piaget’s theories, both in its emphasis on cognitive development
and in its designation of a chronological series of stages,
each dependent on the preceding ones. It also has important implications for the nature-nurture controversy, as it stresses the role of innate rather than environmental factors in moral development. According to
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Wolfgang Köhler
1887-1967
German psychologist and principal figure in the
development of Gestalt psychology.
359

Lawrence Kohlberg

cal scheme of moral development consisting of three levels, each made up of two separate stages. Each stage involves increasingly complex thought patterns, and as
children arrive at a given stage they tend to consider the
bases for previous judgments as invalid. Children from
the ages of seven through ten act on the preconventional
level,at which they defer to adults and obey rules based
on the immediate consequences of their actions. The behavior of children at this level is essentially premoral. At
Stage 1, they obey rules in order to avoid punishment,
while at Stage 2 their behavior is mostly motivated by
the desire to obtain rewards. Starting at around age ten,
children enter the conventional level, where their behavior is guided by the opinions of other people and the desire to conform. At Stage 3, the emphasis is on being a
“good boy” or “good girl” in order to win approval and
avoid disapproval, while at Stage 4 the concept of doing
one’s duty and upholding the social order becomes predominant. At this stage, respecting and obeying authority
(of parents, teachers, God) is an end in itself, without
reference to higher principles. By the age of 13, most
moral questions are resolved on the conventional level.

Wolfgang Köhler

Wolfgang Köhler was born in Revel, Estonia, and
grew up in Wolfenbüttel, Germany. He studied at the
universities of Bonn and Tübingen, and at the Friedrich
Wilhelm University of Berlin, where he received his
Ph.D. in 1909, writing a dissertation on psychoacoustics
under the direction of Carl Stumpf (1848-1936). In 1910,
Köhler began a long professional association with Max
Wertheimer (1880-1943) when he and Kurt Koffka
(1886-1941), both assistants to Friedrich Schumann at
the University of Frankfurt, served as research subjects
for an experiment of Wertheimer’s involving perception
of moving pictures. Within the next ten years, the three
men were to found the Gestalt movement in psychology.
In reaction to the prevailing behavioristic methods of
Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920) and others, the Gestalt
psychologists held that behavior must be studied in all its
complexity rather than separated into discrete components. Köhler’s early work convinced him that perception, learning, and other cognitive functions should be
seen as structured wholes.
Unlike Koffka and Wertheimer, Köhler concentrated
on animal research. Beginning in 1913, he spent more
than six years as director of the anthropoid research facility of the Prussian Academy of Sciences on the island
of Tenerife, where he made many discoveries applying
Gestalt theories to animal learning and perception. His
observations and conclusions from this period contributed to a radical revision of learning theory. One of
his most famous experiments centered on chickens
which he trained to peck grains from either the lighter or
darker of two sheets of paper. When the chickens who
had been trained to prefer the light color were presented
with a choice between that color and a new sheet that
was still lighter, a majority switched to the new sheet.
Similarly, chickens trained to prefer the darker color,
when presented with a parallel choice, chose a new,
darker color. These results, Köhler maintained, showed
that what the chickens had learned was an association
with a relationship, rather than with a specific color. This
finding, which flew in the face of behaviorist theories
deemphasizing the importance of relationships, became
known as the Gestalt law of transposition, because the
test subjects had transposed their original experience to a
new set of circumstances.
Köhler also conducted a series of experiments in
which chimpanzees were confronted with the problem of
obtaining bananas that were hung just out of reach by
using “tools”—bamboo poles and stacked boxes.The
chimpanzees varied in their ability to arrive at the correct combination of actions needed to solve the problem.
Often, a test subject would suddenly find a solution at a
seemingly random point. This research led Köhler to the
concept of learning by a sudden leap of the imagination,
360

Wolfgang Köhler (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

or “insight,” in which a relationship that had not been
seen before was suddenly perceived, a formulation in
conflict with the trial-and-error theory of learning resulting from Edward Thorndike’s puzzle box experiments.
Based on this work, Köhler published The Mentality of
Apes in 1917, demonstrating that Gestalt theory could be
applied to animal behavior.
Köhler returned to Germany after World War I, and
in 1921 was appointed to the most prestigious position in
German psychology, director of the Psychological Institute at the University of Berlin. For the next 14 years he
made the Institute a center for Gestalt studies and was a
noted spokesman for the movement. In 1935, however,
Köhler resigned due to conflicts with the Nazis, and emigrated to the United States, where he served on the faculties of Swarthmore and Dartmouth Colleges. In 1959, he
was appointed president of the American Psychological
Association. There has been some speculation that he
was a spy during World War I, a thesis explored by his
biographer, Ronald Ley. Köhler’s books include Gestalt
Psychology (1929), The Place of Value in a World of
Facts (1938), and Dynamics in Psychology (1940).
See also Behaviorism; Cognitive development;
Gestalt psychology

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Ley, Ronald. A Whisper of Espionage. Garden City Park, NY:
Avery Publishing Group, 1990.
Petermann, Bruno. The Gestalt Theory and the Problem of
Configuration. London: K. Paul, 1932.

Emil Kraepelin
1856-1926
German experimental psychiatrist who classified
types of mental illness and studied their neurological bases.

Emil Kraepelin was a pioneer in the development of
psychiatry as a scientific discipline. He was convinced
that all mental illness had an organic cause, and he was
one of the first scientists to emphasize brain pathology
in mental illness. A renowned clinical and experimental
psychiatrist, Kraepelin developed our modern classification system for mental disease. After analyzing thousands of case studies, he introduced and defined the
terms “dementia praecox” (schizophrenia), “manic-depressive psychosis,” and “paranoia.” As a founder of psychopharmacology, Kraepelin’s experimental work focused on the effects of intoxicants on the central nervous system, on the nature of sleep, and on the effects of
fatigue on the body.
Kraepelin, the son of a civil servant, was born in
1856 in Neustrelitz, in the Mecklenburg district of Germany. He was first introduced to biology by his brother
Karl, 10 years older and, later, the director of the Zoological Museum of Hamburg. Kraepelin began his medical studies at 18, in Leipzig and Wurzburg, Germany. At
Leipzig, he studied psychology with Wilhelm Wundt
and wrote a prize-winning essay, “The Influence of
Acute Illness in the Causation of Mental Disorders.” He
received his M.D. in 1878.

Publishes first edition of his psychiatry
compendium
In 1879, Kraepelin went to work with Bernhard von
Gudden at the University of Munich, where he completed his thesis, The Place of Psychology in Psychiatry. Returning to the University of Leipzig in 1882, he worked
in W. Erb’s neurology clinic and in Wundt’s psychopharmacology laboratory. His major work, Compendium der
Psychiatrie, was first published in 1883. In it, he argued
that psychiatry was a branch of medical science and
should be investigated by observation and experimentation like the other natural sciences. He called for research into the physical causes of mental illness and es-

tablished the foundations of the modern classification
system for mental disorders. Kraepelin proposed that by
studying case histories and identifying specific disorders, the progression of mental illness could be predicted, after taking into account individual differences in
personality and patient age at the onset of disease. In
1884 he became senior physician in Leubus and the following year he was appointed director of the Treatment
and Nursing Institute in Dresden. In 1886, at the age of
30, Kraepelin was named professor of psychiatry at the
University of Dorpat. Four years later, he became department head at the University of Heidelberg, where he remained until 1904.
Following the experimental protocols he had learned
in Wundt’s laboratory, Kraepelin examined the effects of
alcohol, morphine, and other drugs on human subjects.
Applying Wundt’s association experiments to psychiatric
problems, Kraepelin found that the associations made by
psychotic patients were similar to those made by fatigued or intoxicated subjects. In both cases, the associations tended to be superficial and based on habit rather
than on meaningful relationships. Kraepelin also made a
study of primitive peoples, and he examined the frequency of insanity and paralysis in tropical regions. His research on mental illness led him to speak out for social
reforms. He crusaded against the use of alcohol and
against capital punishment, and he spoke out for indeterminate criminal sentences. He developed a museum
depicting the barbarous treatment that was prevalent in
asylums for the insane.

Studies pathologies of mental disorders
In 1904, Kraepelin was named director of the new
psychiatric clinic in Munich and professor of psychiatry
at the university there. Under his direction, the Munich
Clinic became a renowned center for teaching and research in psychiatry. The training of his postgraduate students combined clinical observations with laboratory investigations. Kraepelin rejected the psychoanalytical theories that placed innate sexuality or early sexual experiences at the root of mental illness. Likewise, he rejected
as unscientific the philosophical speculations that were at
the center of much of early twentieth-century psychology.
Kraepelin’s research was based on the painstaking collection of clinical data. He was particularly interested in the
neuropathology of mental illness, and many important
scientists, including Alois Alzheimer, conducted their histological studies of diseased tissues at his clinic.
When Italy declared war on Germany in 1916, Kraepelin’s vacation home on the shores of Lake Maggiore
was confiscated, although following the armistice his
property was returned. However, during the economic cri-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

361

Emil Kraepelin

Further Reading

Emil Kraepelin

sis in postwar Germany, he lost four of his children as well
as his personal property. Kraepelin wrote poetry throughout his life, and his poems were published posthumously.
Kraepelin retired from teaching at the age of 66 and
devoted his remaining years to establishing the German
Institute for Psychiatric Research, which became a
Kaiser Wilhelm Institute within the University of Munich. Built with financial assistance from the Rockefeller
Foundation, the Institute was dedicated two years after
Kraepelin’s death in Munich in 1926. The final edition of
Compendium der Psychiatrie appeared in 1927. Its four
volumes held 10 times more information than the first
edition of 1883. Comparisons of the nine editions reveal

362

phenomenal progress in the science of psychiatry over
the 44-year period. Part of the Compendium was published in English as Manic-Depressive Insanity and
Paranoia. Considerable amount of Kraepelin’s classification system remains in use today.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Talbott, John H. A Biographical History of Medicine: Excerpts
and Essays on the Men and Their Work. New York: Grune
& Stratton, 1970.
Zusne, Leonard. Biographical Dictionary of Psychology. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1984.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

L
Christine Ladd-Franklin
1847-1930
American psychologist, logician, and an internationally recognized authority on the theory of color
vision.

Born in Windsor, Connecticut, Christine LaddFranklin spent her early childhood in New York City. Her
father was a prominent merchant and her mother was a
feminist. Following her mother’s death when LaddFranklin was 13, she moved to Portsmouth, New Hampshire, to live with her paternal grandmother. LaddFranklin attended the Wesleyan Academy in Wilbraham,
Massachusetts for two years, taking classes with boys
preparing to enter Harvard University, and was the valedictorian of her graduating class in 1865. After graduating from Vassar College in 1869 with a primary interest
in mathematics and science, she taught in secondary
schools in Pennsylvania, New York, and Massachusetts
for more than a decade and also published numerous articles on mathematics during this period. In 1878, she applied for admission to Johns Hopkins University for advanced study in mathematics. Because of her extraordinary intellectual ability, Ladd-Franklin was awarded the
stipend of a fellow, although not the actual title because
women were not permitted to pursue graduate study at
the time. Despite completing requirements for the doctorate in 1882, she was denied the degree until 1926.
At the completion of her fellowship in 1882, LaddFranklin married Fabian Franklin, a mathematics professor at Johns Hopkins University, and gave birth to two
children, one of whom died in infancy. Atypical for married women of the time, and without a formal academic
affiliation, she continued to publish scholarly papers,
several of which appeared in the American Journal of
Mathematics. After hearing Charles S. Peirce (18391914) lecture at Johns Hopkins, Ladd-Franklin became
interested in symbolic logic and wrote a paper, “The Algebra of Logic,” that was published in 1883 in a book of

Christine Ladd-Franklin (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

essays by Peirce and his students. In her paper, praised
as a landmark achievement by Harvard philosopher Josiah Royce (1815-1916), Ladd-Franklin reduced all syllogisms to a single formula, in which the three parts form
an “inconsistent triad.”
Ladd-Franklin’s mathematical interests ultimately led
her to make important contributions to the field of psychology. In 1886, she became interested in the geometrical relationship between binocular vision and points in
space and published a paper on this topic in the first volume of the American Journal of Psychology the following
year. During the 1891-92 academic year, Ladd-Franklin

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

363

Ronald David Laing

took advantage of her husband’s sabbatical leave from
Johns Hopkins and traveled to Europe to conduct research
in color vision in the laboratories of Georg Müller (18501934) in Göttingen, and Hermann von Helmholtz (18211894) in Berlin, where she also attended lectures by
Arthur König. In contrast to the prevailing three-color and
opponent-color explanations of color vision, LaddFranklin developed an evolutionary theory that posited
three stages in the development of color vision. Presenting
her work at the International Congress of Psychology in
London in 1892, she argued that black-white vision was
the most primitive stage, since it occurs under the greatest
variety of conditions, including under very low illumination and at the extreme edges of the visual field. The color
white, she theorized, later became differentiated into blue
and yellow, with yellow ultimately differentiated into redgreen vision. Ladd-Franklin’s theory was well-received
and remained influential for some years, and its emphasis
on evolution is still valid today.
After returning to the United States, Ladd-Franklin
taught, lectured, and pursued research. She continued
publishing and presented papers at meetings of both the
American Philosophical Association and the American
Psychological Association, as well as at international
congresses. She lectured in philosophy and logic at
Johns Hopkins between 1904 and 1909, and served as an
associate editor in those fields for Baldwin’s Dictionary
of Philosophy and Psychology. Moving to New York
City with her husband in 1910 when he became an associate editor of the New York Evening Post, Ladd-Franklin
began lecturing at Columbia University. She published
an influential paper on the visual phenomenon known as
“blue arcs” in 1926, when she was in her late seventies,
and in 1929, a year before her death, a collection of her
papers on vision was published under the title Colour
and Colour Theories. In her writings and active correspondence with colleagues, Ladd-Franklin challenged
the mores of the day, championing the cause of women
in matters of equal rights, access to education and the
professions, and the right to vote.
Further Reading
Scarborough, Elizabeth, and Laurel Furumoto. Untold Lives:
The First Generation of American Women Psychologists.
New York: Columbia University Press, 1987, pp. 109-129.

Ronald David Laing
1927-1989
Scottish existential psychiatrist who argued that insanity could be a creative and adaptive response to
the world.
364

Ronald David Laing, or R.D., as he was invariably
known, developed the theory that mental illness was an
escape mechanism that allowed individuals to free themselves from intolerable circumstances. As a revolutionary thinker, he questioned the controls that were imposed
on the individual by family, state, and society. Rejecting
a physiological basis for diseases such as schizophrenia,
Laing argued that madness was a response to insanity in
the environment. A very prolific writer, during the
1960s and 1970s Laing became a hero of the counterculture and the “New Left.”
Born in Glasgow, Scotland, in 1927, Laing was the
only child of a working-class Lowland couple, D. P. M.
and Amelia Laing. A precocious boy, he was physically
abused by his father and he rebelled against his mother’s
fascist anti-Semitic outlook. Musically talented, Laing
might have become a professional pianist had his father
allowed it. Instead, he read his way alphabetically through
his local public library. Interested in the human mind since
childhood, after grammar school Laing entered Glasgow
University to study medicine and psychiatry.
After earning his M.D. degree in 1951 and serving a
six-month internship in neurology and neurosurgery, Laing
was drafted into the British army as a psychiatrist. There he
made friends among his patients rather than among his fellow servicemen. It was during this period that he began to
view psychosis as a potentially positive and justifiable
state. After his two years of service, Laing began working
at the Gartnaval Royal Mental Hospital and teaching in the
Department of Psychological Medicine at Glasgow University. There he began working on his first book, The Divided Self: A Study of Sanity and Madness, completed in
1957 but not published until 1960. In 1956, he moved to
the Tavistock Clinic and the Tavistock Institute of Human
Relations in London, to study Freudian psychoanalysis
and continue his clinical research.

Develops a radical view of schizophrenia
Laing’s view of schizophrenia as an alternative way
of perceiving the world created a storm of controversy.
Traditional psychotherapists objected to his existentialism; but for many readers, The Divided Self expressed
their own alienation from modern society. In The Self
and Others: Further Studies in Sanity and Madness
(1961), which he revised in 1969 as Self and Others, and
in Sanity, Madness, and the Family: Families of Schizophrenics with Aaron Esterson (1964), Laing continued
his examination of the origins of schizophrenia. In Interpersonal Perception (1966), with Herbert Phillipson and
A. Russell Lee, Laing described his theories and research methodologies. With David G. Cooper, he coauthored a study of the untranslated work of the existential-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In The Politics of the Family (1969), Laing began to
apply the theory of sets and mapping used in other social
sciences to the social and psychological structure of families. The work was revised in 1971. In Knots (1970), a
book of poetry, he examined interpersonal relationships
and communication. Following a year of meditation
studies with Hindu and Buddhist masters in Ceylon and
India, Laing undertook a lecture tour of U. S. colleges,
raising funds for the Philadelphia Association.
Laing practiced various forms of yoga and was a
vegetarian who preferred to go barefoot. He published
The Facts of Life: An Essay in Feelings, Facts, and Fantasy in 1976. Laing had five children with his first wife
who remained in Glasgow, and two children with his
second wife, Jutta, in London. Conversations with Children, published in 1978, was a transcription of conversations between his two youngest children. He published
The Voice of Experience in 1982, followed by his autobiography in 1985.

R.D. Laing (Photo by Jerry Bauer. Reproduced with
permission.)

In all, Laing was the author of fifteen books, including several works of poetry. He was a fellow of the
Royal Society of Medicine and was on the editorial
boards of the journals Review of Existential Psychology
and Psychiatry and Existential Psychiatry. Laing died of
a heart attack in St. Tropez, France, in 1989.

ist Jean-Paul Sartre, Reason and Violence: A Decade of
Sartre’s Philosophy, 1950-1960 (1964).

Founds communities for patients and
therapists
At the Langham Clinic for Psychotherapy in London, Laing practiced Jungian psychoanalysis from 1962
until 1965, when his use of psychedelic drugs, both personally and as treatments for his patients, caused controversy. “The Bird of Paradise,” an extended prose poem
included in his 1967 work, The Politics of Experience,
was his description of a hallucinogenic experience. The
book became a bestseller on college campuses. In 1965,
he co-founded an egalitarian community of patients and
physicians at Kingsley Hall in London’s East End. Although the clinic was closed after five years, amidst rumors of outrageous behavior, offshoots continued to
flourish in the London area. Laing’s dream was that
these communities could provide a safe haven for individuals to experience their madness and heal themselves.
To this end, he founded the Philadelphia Association to
support such communities. At the least, he believed that
his methods were superior to the chemical and electrical
shock treatments and lobotomies, which were commonly

See also Existential psychology
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Burston, Daniel. The Wing of Madness: The Life and Work of
R. D. Laing. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1996.
Cohen, David. Psychologists on Psychology. New York: Taplinger, 1977.
Collier, Andrew. R. D. Laing: The Philosophy and Politics of
Psychotherapy. New York: Pantheon, 1977.
Evans, Richard I. R. D. Laing: The Man and His Ideas. New
York: E. P. Dutton, 1976.
Laing, Adrian C. R. D. Laing: A Biography. Chester Springs,
PA: P. Owen, 1994.
Laing, R. D. Wisdom, Madness, and Folly: The Making of a
Psychiatrist. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1985.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Language delay
Term used to describe a problem in acquiring a first
language in childhood on a normal schedule.
365

Language delay

used on schizophrenics. In 1967, while continuing his
private psychoanalytical practice, Laing founded the Institute of Phenomenological Studies in London.

Language delay

The milestones of child language development—
the onset of babbling, first words, first sentences—are
quite variable across individuals in a culture, despite the
universal similarity in the general ages of their development. In one study of 32 normally developing children at
13 months, the average number of words reported by
parents was 12, but the range was 0 to 45. The twoword-sentence stage was reached anywhere from 16 to
28 months in the same sample. In addition, differing
styles of language development are now recognized.
Some children fit the classic pattern of first speaking
one word “sentences,” such as “truck,” then joining two
words “truck fall,” and then three, “my truck fall.” But
other children speak in long unintelligible babbles that
mimic adult speech cadence and rhythm, so the listeners
think they are just missing some important pronouncement. The first is called a referential style, because it
also correlates with attention to names for objects and
event descriptions. The second, with less clearly demarked sentence parts, is called expressive style. Such a
child is quite imitative, has a good rote memory, and
often is engaged in language for social purposes—songs,
routines, greetings, and so forth. The expressive child
seems to be slightly slower at cracking the linguistic
code than the referential child, but the long term differences between the two styles seem insignificant. Given
this range of individual pace and style, how can one tell
if a child is really delayed in language development, and
what are some of the causes?

Monolingual vs. bilingual
A child growing up with two or more languages is often
slower to talk than a monolingual child. This is not surprising given the amount of analysis and code-cracking necessary to organize two systems simultaneously, but the lifelong advantage of knowing two native languages is usually
considered an appropriate balance to the cost of a potential
delay. Bilingualism in children and adults is the norm
throughout the world: monolinguals are the exception. The
learning of each language proceeds in the bilingual child in
much the same way as it does in the monolingual child.
Some mixing may be observed, in which the child uses
words or inflections from the two languages in one utterance. Some report that the bilingual child initially resists
learning words for the same thing in the two languages: for
instance, a child who learned Spanish and English together
learned leche but then would not say milk, a French/English
bilingual used bird but refused to use oiseau.

Language delay and hearing loss
Children with a hearing loss, either from birth or
acquired during the first year or two of life, generally
366

have a serious delay in spoken language development,
despite very early diagnosis and fitting with appropriate
hearing aids. However, in the unusual case that sign
language is the medium of communication in the family rather than speech, such a child shows no delay in
learning to use that language. Hearing development is
always one of the first things checked if a pediatrician
or parent suspects a language delay. The deaf child exposed only to speech will usually begin to babble in
“canonical syllables” (baba, gaga) at a slightly later
point than the hearing child, and recent work suggests
that the babbling is neither as varied nor as sustained as
in hearing children. However, there is often a long
delay until the first words, sometimes not until age two
years or older.
Depending on the severity of the hearing loss, the
stages of early language development are also quite delayed. It is not unusual for the profoundly deaf child
(greater than 90 decibel loss in both ears) at age four or
five years to only have two-word spoken sentences. It is
only on entering specialized training programs for oral
language development that the profoundly deaf child begins to acquire more spoken language, so that the usual
preschool language gains are often made in the grade
school years for such children. Many deaf children learning English have pronounced difficulties in articulation
and speech quality, especially if they are profoundly
deaf, though there is great individual variation. A child
who has hearing for the first few years of life has an
enormous advantage in speech quality and oral language
learning than a child who is deaf from birth or within the
first year.
Apart from speech difficulties, deaf children learning English often show considerable difficulty with the
inflectional morphology and syntax of the language that
marks their writing as well as their speech. The ramifications of this delayed language are significant also for
learning to read, and to read proficiently. The average
reading age of deaf high school students is often only at
the fourth grade level.
For these reasons, many educators of the deaf now
urge early compensatory programs in signed languages,
because the deaf child shows no handicap in learning a
visually based language. Deaf children born to signing
parents begin to “babble” in sign at the same point in
infancy that hearing infants babble speech, and proceed from there to learn a fully expressive language.
However, only 10% of deaf children are born to deaf
parents, so hearing parents must show a commitment
and willingness to learn sign language, too. Furthermore, command of at least written English is still a necessity for such children to be able to function in the
larger community.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Mental retardation can also affect the age at
which children learn to talk. A mentally retarded child
is defined as one who falls in the lower end of the
range of intelligence, usually with an IQ (intelligence
quotient) lower than 80 on some standardized test.
There are many causes of mental retardation, including
identified genetic syndromes such as Down
syndrome, Williams syndrome, or fragile X syndrome.
There are also cases of retardation caused by insults to
the fetus during pregnancy due to alcohol, drug abuse,
or toxicity, and disorders of the developing nervous
system such as hydrocephalus. Finally, there are environmental causes following birth such as lead poisoning, anoxia, or meningitis. Any of these is likely to
slow down the child’s rate of development in general,
and thus to have effects on language development.
However, most children with very low IQs nevertheless develop some language, suggesting it is a relatively “buffered” system that can survive a good deal of
insult to the developing brain.
For example, in cases of hydrocephalus it has been
noted that children who are otherwise quite impaired intellectually can have impressive conversational language
skills. Sometimes called the “chatterbox syndrome,” this
linguistic sophistication belies their poor ability to deal
with the world. In an extreme case, a young man with a
tested IQ in the retarded range has an apparent gift for
acquiring foreign languages, and can learn a new one
with very little exposure. For example, he can do fair
translations at a rapid pace from written langages as diverse as Danish, Dutch, Hindi, Polish, French, Spanish,
and Greek. He is in fact a savant in the area of language,
and delights in comparing linguistic systems, though he
cannot live independently.
Adults should not consider retarded children to be a
uniform class; different patterns can arise with different
syndromes. For example in hydrocephalic children and
in Williams syndrome, language skills may be preserved
to a degree that is discrepant from their general intellectual level. In other groups, including Down syndrome,
there may be more delay in language than in other mental abilities.
Most retarded children babble during the first year
and develop their first words within a normal time span,
but are then slow to develop sentences or a varied vocabulary. Vocabulary size is one of the primary components
of standardized tests of verbal intelligence, and it grows
slowly in retarded children. Nevertheless, the process of
vocabulary development seems quite similar: retarded
children also learn words from context and by incidental
learning, not just by direct instruction.

Grammatical development, though slow, does not
seem particularly deviant, in that the morphology comes
in the same way, and in the same order, as it does for
normal IQ children. The child’s conversation may be
marked by more repetition and routines than creative
uses, however. By the early teens, the difference in the
variety of forms used in a sample of conversation may be
more striking in some groups. There may be important
differences among types of retarded children in their
grammatical proficiency. As of the 1990s, these differences are just beginning to be uncovered. The Down syndrome adolescent with an IQ of around 50 points does
not seem to progress beyond the grammatical level of the
normally intelligent child at three years, with short sentences that are quite restricted in variety and complexity.
Children with Down syndrome are also particularly delayed in speech development. This is due in part to the
facial abnormalities that characterize this syndrome, including a relatively large tongue, and also is linked to the
higher risk they appear to suffer from ear infections and
hearing loss. Speech therapy can be a considerable aid in
making such a child’s speech more intelligible. Despite
the delay, children with Down syndrome are often quite
sociable and interested in language for conversation.

Language delay and blindness
Children who are blind from birth sometimes have
other neurological problems, which makes it difficult to
assess the effect of blindness itself on cognitive and linguistic development. However, in the cases where blindness seems to be the only condition affecting the child,
some initial language delays are noted. On average,
blind children seem to be delayed about eight months in
the onset of words. In general, though, detailed longitudinal studies have revealed that the blind child learns
language in much the same way as the sighted child,
with perhaps more reliance on routines and formulas in
conversation. Linguists are interested in the process by
which blind children learn to use words such as see and
look given their lack of experience with sight, but these
words were found to come in quite normally, with the
appropriately changed meaning of “touch” and “explore
tactilely.”
Jill De Villiers Ph.D.
Further Reading
Landau, B., and L. Gleitman. Language and Experience: Evidence from the Blind Child. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
University Press, 1985.
Nelson, K. “Individual Differences in Language Development:
Implications for Development and Language.” Developmental Psychology 17, 1981, pp. 170-87.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

367

Language delay

Language delay and mental retardation

Language development

Babbling

Language development
The process by which children acquire their first
language in early childhood.

Human infants are acutely attuned to the human
voice, and prefer it above all other sounds. In fact, they
prefer the higher pitch ranges characteristic of female
voices. They are also attentive to the human face, particularly the eyes, which they stare at even more if the face
is talking. These preferences are present at birth, and
some research indicates that babies even listen to their
mother’s voice during the last few months of pregnancy.
Babies who were read to by their mothers while in the
womb showed the ability to pick out her voice from
among other female voices.

Infancy
Since the early 1970s, it has been known that babies
can detect very subtle differences between English
phonemes (the functional units of speech sound). For example, they can detect the difference between “pa” and
“ba,” or between “da” and “ga.” Of course, they do not
attach meaning to the differences for 12 months or more.
The original technique of investigating this capacity capitalized on babies’ innate ability to suck on a nipple. The
nipple is linked to a device that delivers sound contingent on the baby’s sucking. Babies introduced to this device suck vigorously to hear the sound, even when it is a
repetitive “ba ba ba ba.” Because babies also get bored
with repetition, they stop sucking hard after a few minutes. At that point the researcher can change the sound in
subtle ways, and see if the baby shows renewed interest.
For example, it might be a different example of “ba,”
perhaps one with a bit more breathiness. Or, it could
play a sound that would fall into a new phoneme class
for adults, like “pa.” Babies ignore the first kind of
change, just as adults would, but they suck with new
vigor for the new phoneme.
Babies have finely tuned perception when it comes
to speech sounds, and, more importantly, they seem to
classify many sounds the same way adult speakers
would, a phenomenon known as categorical perception .
These sounds that they perceive as indivisible categories
are generally those that form the basis for many speech
systems in the world’s languages, rather than those that
are used only rarely, like “th.” Infants come into the
world already predisposed to make certain distinctions
and classifications: apparently they are not driven to
make them by language exposure.
368

At the beginning of infancy, vegetative noises and
crying predominate. Observers note that by the age of
four months, the baby’s repertoire has expanded in more
interesting ways. By this point babies are smiling at
caregivers and in doing so they engage in a cooing noise
that is irresistible to most parents. When the baby is
being fed or changed, she will frequently lock gazes with
her caregiver and coo in a pleasant way, often making
noises that sound like “hi,” and gurgles. It is common for
the caregiver to respond by echoing these noises, thereby
creating an elaborate interchange that can last many minutes. This may not happen universally, however, as not
all cultures take the baby’s vocalization so seriously. The
nature of the sounds made at this stage is not fully
speech-like, though there are open mouth noises like
vowels, and an occasional “closure” akin to a consonant,
but without the full properties that normally make a syllable out of the two.
At some point between four and 10 months, the infant begins producing more speech-like syllables, with a
full resonant vowel and an appropriate “closure” of the
stream of sound, approaching a true consonant. This
stage is called “canonical babbling.”
At about six to eight months, the range of vocalizations grows dramatically, and babies can spend hours
practicing the sounds they can make with their mouths.
Not all of these are human phonemes, and not all of them
are found in the language around them. Research has
shown that Japanese and American infants sound alike at
this stage, and even congenitally deaf infants babble,
though less frequently. These facts suggest that the infant
is “exercising” her speech organs, but is not being guided very much, if at all, by what she has heard.
By age 10 or 12 months, however, the range of
sounds being produced has somewhat narrowed, and
now babies’ babbling in different cultures begin to take
on sound characteristics of the language that surrounds
them. The babbling at this stage often consists of reduplicated syllables like “bababa” or “dadada” or “mamama.” It is no accident that most of the world’s languages
have chosen, as names for parents, some variant of
“papa,” “mama,” “dada,” “nana.” These coincide with articulations that baby can make most easily at the end of
the first year.

Toddlerhood
The first words make their appearance any time between nine and 15 months or so, depending on the
child’s precocity and the parent’s enthusiasm in noticing.
That is, the baby begins making sounds that occur fairly

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Language development

Average vocabulary growth of children from ages 1 to 7.

reliably in some situations AND are at least a vague approximation to an adult-sounding word.
What the baby “means” by these sounds is questionable at first. But before long, the baby uses the sounds to
draw a caregiver’s attention, and persists until she gets it,
or uses a sound to demand an object, and persists until it
is given to her. At this point the first words are being
used communicatively as well. There is a fairly protracted period for most babies in which their first words come
and go, as if there is a “word of the week” that replaces
those gone before. One of the characteristics about these
first words is that they may be situation-specific, such as
the case of a child who says “car” only when looking
down on the roofs of cars from her balcony. But after
several months of slow growth, there is an explosion of
new words, often called the “word spurt.” This usually
coincides with an interest in what things are called, e.g.,
the child asking some variant of “What’s that?” Vocabulary climbs precipitously from then on—an estimated
nine new words a day from ages 2 to 18 years. These developments are noted in all the cultures that have been
studied to date.
The nature of the child’s first 50 words is quite similar across cultures: the child often names foods, pets, animals, family members, toys, vehicles and clothing that

the child can manipulate. Most of what is named can either move or be moved by the child: she generally omits
words for furniture, geographical features, buildings,
weather and so forth. Children vary in that some develop
an early vocabulary almost exclusively of “thing” words
and actions, whereas others develop a social language:
words for social routines, and expressions of love, and
greetings. Researchers differ as to whether these are seen
as different styles inherent in the child or whether their
social environment encourages them in different ways.
Researchers agree that the child learns most effectively
from social and interactive routines with an accomplished talker (who may be an older child), and not, at
least at the start, from passive observations of adults
talking, or from radio or TV shows. Experiments and observations show that children pick up words at this stage
most rapidly when the caregiver uses them to name or
comment on what the child is already focused on.
Word meanings
The meanings of the child’s first words are not necessarily the same as those of the adults around her. For
instance, children may “overgeneralize” their first words
to refer to items beyond their usual scope of application.
A child might call all men “Daddy,” or all animals “dog-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

369

Language development

gie,” or all round objects “ball.” Others have pointed out
that “undergeneralization” also occurs, though it is less
likely to be noticed. For instance, a child might call only
her own striped ball “ball,” and stay silent about all the
rest, or refer to the family dog and others of the same
type as “doggie” but not name any others. The child may
also use a word to refer to a wide variety of objects that
hold no single property in common. A child who learned
“moon” for the full moon later used it for street lamps,
house lights (lights in common), doorknobs and the dial
on the dishwasher (shape in common), and toenail clippings on a rug (related shape). Put into a class, these objects share nothing in common except a shifting form of
resemblance to the original moon. It has been argued
that children’s first word meanings have only a family
resemblance rather than a common thread. In fact, there
are philosophers who argue that such is the nature of
many adult words as well.
It has long been recognized that words are inherently
ambiguous even when an object is being pointed at: does
the word refer to the object, or its color, shape, texture,
function, shadow? Recent work on word learning has also
drawn attention to the biases the child brings to word learning. One such bias is the Whole-Object assumption, that is,
children assume a new word refers to the object itself
rather than a property. However, a competing constraint is
mutual exclusivity : if a child already knows a word for an
object, a new word is assumed to mean something else; a
new object if it is available; or a part, texture, or shape of a
known one. Researchers are divided at present on the extent to which these biases are learned, or inherent.
Young children also frequently name objects at an
intermediate level of abstraction known as the basic object level. That is, they will use the word dog, rather than
the more specific collie or the more general, animal, or
flower rather than dandelion or plant. This coincides
with the naming practices of most parents, and seems to
be the level of greatest utility for the two-year old.

Preschool years: the two-year-old
Grammar: the two-word utterance
The first sentence is the transition that separates humans from other creatures. Most toddlers produce their
first spontaneous two-word sentence at 18 to 24 months,
usually once they have acquired between 50 and 500
words. Before their first sentence, they often achieve the
effect of complex expressions by stringing together their
simple words:
Book
Mine
Read
370

Then their first sentence puts these words under a
single intonational envelope, with no pause. Their first
sentences are not profound, but they represent a major
advance in the expression of meaning. The listener is
also freed of some of the burden of interpretation and
does not need to guess so much from context.
For children learning English, their first sentences
are telegraphic, that is, content words predominate, primarily the nouns and verbs necessary in the situation.
Words that have grammatical functions, but do not themselves make reference, such as articles, prepositions and
auxiliary verbs, do not occur very often. The true character of this grammar is hotly debated. The fact that the
function words and inflections appear variably for a protracted period of months leads some researchers to argue
that the child really knows the grammar but has some
kind of production limit that precludes saying extra
words. On the other side, some researchers argue that the
forms that do appear may be imitations, or particular
learned fragments, and that the full grammar is not yet
present. Tests of comprehension or judgment that might
decide between these alternatives are very hard to undertake with two-year-old children, though the little work
that does exist suggests children are sensitive to the
items they omit in their own speech.
At the start, the child combines the single words into
two-word strings that usually preserve the common order
of parents’ sentences in English. At the time the Englishspeaking child is producing many two-word utterances,
comprehension tests show he can also distinguish between sentences that contrast in word order and hence
meaning:
The dog licks the cat.
The cat licks the dog.
Researchers using innovative techniques with preverbal infants have claimed infants understand basic
word order contrasts before they learn to produce them.
Infants who saw a choice of two brief movies along with
spoken sentences preferred to look at the movie of the
event that was congruent with the spoken sentence,
where the only contrast was in word order.
Semantic relations
Most studies on early child language conclude that
the child at the two-word stage is concerned with the
expression of a small set of semantic relationships.
The cross-linguistic study of children includes languages as remotely related as French, Samoan, Luo
(spoken in Kenya), German, Finnish, and Cakchiquel
(a Mayan language spoken in Guatemala). Two-yearold children learning all these languages expressed
only a narrow range of the possible meanings that the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Debate has raged over how significant this finding
of universal semantic relations is for the study of
grammatical development. On the one hand, it might
mean that building a grammar based on meaningful relations is a universal first step for language learning.
On the other hand, there is the larger problem of how
the child builds a grammar that resembles the adult’s,
because for true linguistic competence, the child needs
to build a theory out of the right components: subjects,
objects, noun phrases, verb phrases, and the rest. These
abstract categories do not translate easily into semantic
relations, if at all. To succeed at analyzing or parsing
adult sentences into their true grammatical parts, the
child must go beyond general meaning. The alternative
interpretation of the findings about the first sentences
is that children all over the world are constrained by
their cognitive development to talk about the same
ideas and that their doing so need not mean that their
grammars are based solely on semantic relations. So
the semantic analysis of children’s early sentences offers fascinating data on the meanings children express
at that age, but it is less clear that these semantic notions are the components out of which children’s grammars are constructed. A weaker hypothesis about the
role of semantics in the learning of grammar is that
perhaps children exploit the correlation between certain grammatical notions, like subject, and certain semantic notions, like agent, to begin parsing adult sentences. The child could then proceed to analyze sentences by knowing already:
a. the meaning of the individual words
b. the conceptual structure of the event, namely that
dog is the agent; bit is the action.
Some have proposed that the child may have some
further, possibly innate, “hypotheses” that guide his
code-cracking:
c. actions are usually verbs
d. things are usually nouns
e. agents are usually subjects.
Semantic notions then become vital bootstraps for
the learning of grammar.

Preschool years: the three-year-old
Shades of meaning
What is missing from the two-word stage are all the
modulations of meaning, the fine tunings, which add immeasurably to the subtlety of what we can express. Consider the shades of meaning in the following sentences:
He played
He’s playing
He was playing
He has played
He had played
He will play
He will have played
Not all languages make these distinctions explicitly,
and some languages make distinctions that English does
not. In the next stage of development of English, the
extra little function words and inflections that modulate
the meaning of the major syntactic relations make their
appearance, though it is years until they are fully mastered. For English, it is common to measure the stage of
language development by counting and then averaging
the morphemes (words and inflections) in a child’s set of
utterances, and refer to that as the mean length of utterance (MLU). The inflections are surprisingly variable in
children’s utterances, sometimes present and sometimes
absent even within the same stretch of conversation. According to psychologist R. Brown, “All these, like an intricate sort of ivy, begin to grow up between and among
the major constituent blocks, the nouns and verbs, to
which stage I is largely limited.”
A classic error noticed in the acquisition of English
inflections is the overgeneralization of plurals and past
tenses. In each case, when the regular inflection begins
to be mastered, it is overgeneralized to irregular forms,
resulting in errors like foots, sheeps, goed and eated. In
the case of the past tense, children usually begin by correctly using a few irregular forms like fell and broke, perhaps because these forms are frequent in the input and
the child learns them by rote. At first they may not be
fully analyzed as past tenses of the corresponding verbs
fall and break. But when the child begins to produce regular past tense endings, the irregulars are sometimes also
regularized (e.g. falled and breaked). Two kinds of overgeneralizations occur: one in which the -ed ending is attached to the root form of the irregular verb (e.g. sing singed) and the other in which the ending is attached to
the irregular past form (e.g. broke -broked).

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

371

Language development

adult language could express. All over the world, children apparently talk about the same meanings—or
ideas—in their first sentences, despite the variety of
forms in those languages. For example, the children
refer to possession (Mommy dish, my coat), action-object sequences (hit ball, drop fork), attribute of an object (big truck, wet pants) or an object’s location (cup
shelf, teddy bed).

Language development

Cross-linguistic work
An understanding of how children acquire grammatical morphemes is now thought to require a broader perspective than that obtained from studying English alone.
A large research initiative has gathered data from children acquiring other languages, especially languages very
different from English. Researchers have studied children
acquiring Luo, Samoan, Kaluli, Hungarian, Sesotho and
many others in an effort to understand the process of language acquisition in universal terms. One finding is that
the telegraphic speech style of English children is not
universal—in more heavily inflected languages like Italian, even the youngest speakers do not strip their sentences to the bare stems of nouns and verbs.
One of the purposes of the cross-linguistic work is
to try to disentangle some of the variables that are confounded in a single language. For example: Englishspeaking children acquire the hypothetical (if…then
statements) rather late, around four years of age, but the
hypothetical form is complex in English grammar. It requires an ability to imagine an unreal situation. Crosslinguistic studies provide a way to tease these variables
apart, for Russian has a very simple hypothetical form,
though its meaning is as complex as the English version.
Research shows that Russian children do not use this
simple form until after they are about four years of age.
Most morphemes vary along multiple dimensions:
phonological, semantic and grammatical. The full program of research may reach fruition only when the massive matrix of possibilities across the world’s languages
can be entered into a computer, complete with detailed
longitudinal data from children learning those languages.
Auxiliaries
Children’s first sentences lack any auxiliaries or
tense markers:
Me go home
Daddy have tea
and they also lack auxiliary-inversion for questions
at this stage:
I ride train?
Sit chair?
They also lack a system for assigning nominative
case to the subject, that is, adult sentences mark the subject as nominative:
Adult: I want that book

372

In addition to learning the basic word order and inflectional system of the language, a child must learn how
to produce sentences of different kinds: not just simple
active declarative, but also negatives, questions, imperatives, passives and so forth. In English there are word
order changes and auxiliary changes for these sentence
modalities.
One type of question is called a yes/no question, for
the simple reason that it requires a yes or a no answer. A
second kind of question is called the Wh-question, socalled because it usually begins with the sequence Wh in
English (in French, they are Qu-questions). Wh-questions do not require a simple yes or no response: instead
they ask for information about one of the constituents in
the sentence. What, who, when, where, why, and how all
stand in for possible phrases in the sentence—the subject, or object, or a prepositional phrase. Discourse permits us to respond elliptically with only the missing constituent if we choose:
What is he buying?
Coffee.
Where is she going?
To the store.
How is she getting there?
By bike.
The structure of such questions is similar to that of
yes/no questions because the auxiliary and subject are
inverted, so that transformation is involved in both. In
addition, the Wh-word is in initial position, though it
stands for constituents in varied sentence positions. Linguistic evidence suggests that the Wh-word originated at
another site in the structure and was moved there by a
grammatical rule, called, appropriately, Wh-movement.
Children’s responses to such questions reveal the sophisticated nature of their grammatical knowledge.
Negation also involves the auxiliary component in
the sentence, because for simple sentence negation, the
negative is attached to the first member of the auxiliary,
and may be contracted:
She isn’t coming home.

but children at this stage frequently use the accusative case:
Child: Me want that book

These facts lead some to conclude that young children’s sentences lack the full syntactic structures typical
of adult sentences, and undergo a radical restructuring as
they develop. Others argue that the limitation is not so
much at the level of knowledge of grammar, but merely
performance limits, so preserving the continuity of form
at an abstract level between child and adult.

He won’t be having any.
How do children acquire these rules of English?
When auxiliaries do emerge, it seems that they come in

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

May I have one?
When auxiliaries do begin to appear in initial position, what has the child learned? One of the claims made
by modern linguistic theory is that the rules of natural
languages are “structure dependent,” that is, they always
refer to structural units, constituents such as “noun
phrase” or “auxiliary verb,” not to other arbitrary units
such as “the fifth word” or “the first word beginning with
‘f’.” The case of auxiliary inversion provides a nice illustration, used by Noam Chomsky to make this point. The
child could hear sentence pairings such as:

Wh-questions
Wh-questions appear among the child’s first utterances, often in a routine form such as “Whazzat?” The
forms are routines because they are invariant in form, but
more varied productions are not slow to emerge in children’s grammar. The first, stereotyped forms may be tied
to particular functions or contexts, but genuine interrogatives are varied not only in form but in use.
Just as in yes/no questions, the auxiliary must be in
front of the subject noun phrase in a Wh-question, and
children seem to have more difficulty with auxiliary-inversion in Wh-questions than in yes/no questions. At the
same time children can say:
Can he come?
they might say:

The man is here,

Why he can come?

Is the man here?

failing to invert the auxiliary in the Wh-question.

The boy can swim.

What else does the child have to learn in Wh-questions? One factor concerns the link between the Whword and the “missing constituent.” Certain of the Whwords enter children’s speech earlier than others, and
there is some consistency across studies in that order:
What, who, and where tend to emerge before why and
how, with when coming later. Some have explained the
order in terms of semantics, or rather concreteness, of
the ideas contained in these words, since when and how
depend upon cognitive developments of time and causality whereas what and who do not. The question why
seems to be late for this reason: it is only through discourse that a child can determine the meaning of why,
which may be the reason some young children ask it
endlessly. It is also a question that rarely elicits a oneword answer, so it may be a way to keep the conversation going when you can’t say much yourself yet!

Can the boy swim?
The dog will bite.
Will the dog bite?
and draw the conclusion that to make a question,
you take the third word and move it to the front. Of
course, that hypothesis would soon be disconfirmed by a
pair such as:
The tall man will come.
Will the tall man come?
not: Man the tall will come?
More likely, the child might form the rule “move the
first word like can, will, is, etc. up to the front,” which
would fit all of the above and hundreds of other such
sentences. However, that is not a structure-dependent
rule, because it makes no reference to the grammatical
role that word plays in the sentence. The only disconfirmation would come from the occasions when a subject
relative clause appears before the auxiliary:
The man who is the teacher will be coming tomorrow.
Will the man who is the teacher be coming tomorrow?
but our earlier, structure-independent rule would
produce:
Is the man who the teacher will be coming tomorrow?
The child who formulated the almost-adequate rule
would fail in such circumstances, but no child has been
observed to make the mistake. Hence even from the inadequate data that children receive, they formulate a
complex, structure-dependent rule.

Creativity
A feature that is markedly evident in young children
is their creativity with language. Children, like adults,
continually produce sentences they have not heard before, and one can more easily recognize that novelty in
children because sometimes the ideas are rather strange.
For example, after hearing many “tag questions” such as
“That’s nice, isn’t it?” and “You’re a good girl, aren’t
you?” and “You can open that, can’t you?” a three-yearold figured out how to make her own tags, and used the
rules to say, “Goosebumps are hairy legs, aren’t they?”
and “He’s a punk rocker, isn’t he?,” which were definitely not sentences she had heard. In addition, the creative
use is revealed because children overextend rules to exceptional cases. For example, a child may say “My porridge is getting middle-sizeder” as he struggles through a

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

373

Language development

first in declarative sentences. Before children master the
placement of the auxiliary, they ask questions using rising intonation. They may also pick up a few routine
forms of yes/no questions, particularly in households
that demand politeness from young children, as in:

Language development

huge bowl of oatmeal. It can also occur because children
do not yet have the vocabulary for certain subtleties of
expression. But the way that children fill these “lexical
gaps” uses the same principles as adults who do the
same thing. For example, an adult might use an “innovative verb” such as “I weekended in New York,” and a
child might similarly say, “I broomed her!” after pursuing a sibling with a broom. However, a child who said
“You have to scale it first” as she put a bag on a scale
was creating an innovation for which there is already an
existing word—namely, weigh. The creativity of children’s linguistic innovations has been emphasized because it demonstrates that children do not just imitate
what they hear, but extract general rules and principles
that allow them to form new expressions.

Later preschool years
Joining sentences
Once the child has mastered the fundamentals of
sentence construction, what is left to learn? Actually,
language would be very dull to listen to or read if we
could just produce simple sentences with one verb at a
time. Perhaps the first response of a novice to the field of
child language is that the sentences children speak are
short and not very complicated for a long period. Certainly when one measures the mean length of utterance
of children younger than age four, it tends not to be very
impressive, ranging from 1.0 to 4.0 morphemes per utterance. Yet by age four, the MLU (mean length of utterance) loses much of its usefulness as a measure, because
children’s utterances, like those of an adult, fluctuate in
length dramatically depending on the circumstances of
the conversation. Even before age four, there are rare, but
significant, occurrences of surprising complexity, showing that the child is in command of a considerable
amount of grammar when needed. The first sentences involving more than one “proposition” are simple coordinations, for instance two sentences joined by and. Later
other conjunctions come in, such as so, but, after, or because. But embeddings are not much later: there is evidence of embedded structures even in the primitive talk
of two-year-olds.
There are different kinds of embedded structures.
One kind are relative clauses, clauses that are used to
further specify a noun phrase:
The man who took the job is coming to dinner.
Here is a sample sentence from a child at 2;10 (2
years, 10 months), said in reference to playground equipment:
I’m going on the one that you’re sitting on.
374

or the slightly aberrant:
Where’s a hammer we nailed those nails in?
On the other hand are complement constructions,
which can be considered the equivalent further specification of the verb phrase:
The doctor decided to perform the operation.
Again, a child at age 2;11 was observed to say:
I don’t like Nicky share a banana.
I’m going downstairs to see what Nicky’s watching.
Both kinds of embedding are means of packing information into a single sentence that would require multiple sentences (probably with lots of pointing) to convey
the equivalent ideas. When children reach the stage at
which they can control these and similar structures, they
become capable of expressing a much wider variety of
ideas and thoughts not dependent on the immediate environment for support, and an important further step is
taken in being ready for literacy.
Researchers have used innovative procedures to
elicit relative clause structures from children as young as
two by arranging the situation to call for specification of
a referent. In one procedure, for example, the child, the
experimenter, and a confederate are playing with two
identical toy bears. The experimenter makes one bear
ride a bike. Then the confederate is blindfolded, and the
child alone watches the experimenter make that same
bear do another action, say jump. Then the blindfold is
removed from the confederate and the child has to help
him guess which bear did something. Children of two
and three can say:
Pick the one that rode the bike.
If the literature on comprehension of relative clauses
is considered, it appears that children below age five are
in very poor control of relative clause sentences. The
typical comprehension task uses an “act-out” procedure
in which several small animals are provided to the child
and he is asked to act out whatever the experimenter
says. After a couple of simple warm-ups, e.g.,
Show me:
The lion hit the kangaroo.
The dog jumped.
the child would be asked to act out relative clause
structures in which there are no clues to meaning from
the words alone, i.e., the syntax carries all the meaning:
The lion that hit the dog bit the turtle.
The cat that the dog pushed licked the mouse.
When preschoolers are given such a task, their performance is usually fairly poor, suggesting that they con-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Similarly, even five- and six-year-olds continue to
have trouble figuring out who did what to whom for sentences containing various kinds of complements:
Fred told Harry to wash the car.
Fred promised Harry to wash the car.
Fred told Harry that he washed the car.
Fred told Harry after he washed the car.
The various “complement-taking” verbs in English
fall into several distinct patterns, as do the complements
themselves, so there is room for lots of confusion.
Finally, there are aspects of the pronoun system that
may take several years to get straight. Pronouns in English have to have an “antecedent” (noun which is referred
to by the pronoun) outside the sentence in which the pronoun occurs: you can’t say, for example:
John hit him.

laboratory—it is enmeshed in the social relationships
and circumstances of the child. The child uses language
for communication with peers, siblings, parents, and increasingly, relative strangers. All of these individuals
make special demands on the child in terms of their different status, knowledge, requirements of politeness,
clarity or formality, to which the child must adjust and
adapt, and the preschool child is only beginning this
process of language socialization. Even four-year-olds
adjust their style, pitch and sentence length when talking
to younger children or infants rather than peers or older
people, and in other cultures they master formal devices
that acknowledge the status or group membership of different people. However, it is recognized that the threeyear-old is rather poor at predicting what others know or
think, and therefore will be rather egocentric in expressing himself. Especially when communicating across a
barrier or over a telephone, the child of this age might be
unable to supply the right kind of information to a listener. However, other researchers show that children become increasingly adept at “repairing” their own communicative breakdowns as they get older.

and mean John hit himself. Reflexives like “himself,” on the other hand, have to be in the same clause as
their antecedent; you can’t say:
John was wondering why Fred hit himself.
and have it mean that Fred hit John. Children’s control over antecedents, particularly of pronouns, is still
being acquired after age four or five when complex sentences are involved.

Later word learning
The child’s vocabulary grows enormously in the age
period two to five years, and vocabulary size is frequently used by researchers as an index of the child’s development. In addition to learning many new nouns and verbs,
the child must organize vocabulary, for example, into hierarchies: that Rover is also a dog, a corgi, an animal, a
living thing and so on. The child also learns about opposites and relatedness—all necessary forms of connection
among words in the “inner lexicon.” The child also becomes better able to learn words from linguistic context
alone, rapidly homing in on the meaning after only a few
scattered exposures. This is a surprisingly effective
process, though hardly fail-safe: after being told that
screens were to stop flies from bringing germs into the
house, one child concluded that germs were “things flies
play with.”
Discourse and reference
Researchers have been acutely aware that the child’s
language learning does not take place in a vacuum or a

Narrative and literacy
The difficulty that children have with predicting
what others already know or believe shows itself also in
their attempts to produce narratives, that is, extended
sentences that convey a story. Retelling a story is considerably easier than constructing one about witnessed
events, but may need considerable “scaffolding” by a patient listener who structures it by asking leading questions. Skill in producing a coherent narrative is one of
the culminating achievements of language acquisition,
but it is acquired late and varies widely according to opportunity for practice and experience with stories. In
part, this is because creating a narrative is a cultural
event: different cultures have different rules for how stories are structured, which must be learned. At first, children tend to focus just on the actions, with little attention
to the motives, or reasons, or consequences of those actions, and little overarching structure that might explain
the events. Young children also fail to use the linguistic
devices that maintain cohesion among referents, so they
may switch from talking about one character to another
and call them all “he,” to the bewilderment of the listener. Reading and writing in the grade school years depend
on this ability and nurture it further, and one of the best
predictors of reading readiness is how much children
were read to in the first few years. As children begin to
read and write, there are further gains in their vocabulary
(and new ways to acquire it) and new syntactic forms
emerge that are relatively rare in speaking but play important roles in text, such as stage-setting and maintain-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

375

Language development

tinue to have difficulty reconstructing the speaker’s
meaning from complex structures: a problem perhaps in
processing rather than grammar per se.

Language disorder

ing cohesion. Mastery of these devices requires a sensitivity to the reader’s needs, and it is a lifelong developmental process.
Jill De Villiers Ph.D.
Further Reading
Berko-Gleason, J. The Development of Language. New York:
Macmillan, 1993.
de Villiers, P., and J. de Villiers. Early Language. The Developing Child series. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1979.
Fletcher, P., and B. MacWhinney. The Handbook of Child Language. Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell Publishers, 1995.
Goodluck, H. Language Acquisition: A Linguistic Introduction.
Cambridge, Mass.: Blackwell Publishers, 1991.
Pinker, S. The Language Instinct. New York: Morrow, 1994.

Language disorder
Problem with any function of language and communication.

In adults, much of what is known about the organization of language functions in the brain has come from
the study of patients with focal brain lesions. It has been
known for hundreds of years that a left-hemisphere injury to the brain is more likely to cause language disturbance—aphasia—than a right hemisphere injury, especially but not exclusively in right-handed persons. For
about a hundred years, certain areas in the adult left
hemisphere—Broca’s area in the posterior frontal lobe,
and Wernicke’s area in the temporal lobe—have been
identified as centrally involved in language functions.
However, researchers in the field of adult aphasia are divided over the exact role these brain areas play in language processing and production. Damage to Broca’s
area results in marked problems with language fluency;
with shortened sentences, impaired flow of speech, poor
control of rhythm and intonation (known as prosody);
and a telegraphic style, with missing inflections and
function words. In contrast, the speech of Wernicke’s
aphasics is fluent and often rapid, but with relatively
empty content and many neologisms (invented words)
and word substitutions. It was initially believed that the
two areas were responsible for output (Broca’s) versus
input (Wernicke’s), but research does not confirm such a
simple split.
Other theories ask whether the two areas might be
differentially involved in syntax versus semantics, or
phonology versus the lexicon, but the picture is not clear.
Some have argued that adult aphasic patients, once they
376

are stable after their injury or stroke, employ many compensatory devices that conceal or disguise the central
character of their language difficulties. It then becomes
more difficult to assess what is missing or disturbed because the difficulties are overlaid by new strategies, and
perhaps new areas of the brain taking over functions for
the damaged areas.
Infants and young children who suffer focal brain lesions in advance of acquiring language provide valuable
information to neuroscientists who want to know how
“plastic” the developing brain is with respect to language
functions. For instance, is the left hemisphere uniquely
equipped for language, or could the right hemisphere do
as well? What if Broca’s or Wernicke’s areas were damaged before language was acquired? Thirty years ago a
review of literature on children who had incurred brain
lesions suggested that, unlike the case of adults, recovery
from language disruption after left-brain damage was
rapid and without lasting effect. Researchers concluded
that the two hemispheres of the brain were equipotential
for language until around puberty, and that this allowed
young brain-damaged children to compensate with their
undamaged right hemisphere.
However, several studies suggested that left-brain
damage caused greater disruption to language than rightsided damage even in the youngest subjects. Children
known to be using only their right hemisphere for language (because they had undergone removal of the left
hemisphere for congenital abnormalities) demonstrated
subtle syntactic deficits on careful linguistic testing, but
the deficits failed to show in ordinary conversational
analysis. Almost all of these studies were retrospective,
that is, they looked at the performance of children at an
older age who had suffered an early lesion. Furthermore,
the technology for scanning the brain and locating the lesion site, then carefully matching the subjects, was much
less developed.
With the invention of new technologies including
CT scans and Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), several studies have been conducted to look prospectively at
the language development of children with focal, defined lesions specifically in the traditional language
areas. There is surprising concordance among the studies
in their results: all of them find initial (but variable) delays in the onset of lexical, syntactic, and morphological
development followed by remarkably similar progress
after about age two to three years. Lasting deficits have
not been noticed in these children. Surprisingly, there are
also no dramatic effects of laterality: lesions to either
side of the brain seem to produce virtually the same effects. However, most of the data comes from conversational analysis or relatively unstructured testing, and
these children have not been followed until school age.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Karl Spencer Lashley

Until those detailed studies are extended, it is difficult to
reconcile the differing results of the retrospective and
prospective studies. Nevertheless, the findings suggest
remarkable plasticity and robustness of language in spite
of brain lesions that would devastate an adult’s system.
Jill De Villiers Ph.D.
Further Reading
Byers Brown, B., and M. Edwards. Developmental Disorders
of Language. San Diego: Singular Publishing, 1989.
Miller, J. Research on Child Language Disorders: A Decade of
Progress. Austin, TX: Pro-ed, 1991.

Karl Spencer Lashley
1890-1958
American neuropsychologist who demonstrated relationships between animal behavior and the size
and location of brain injuries, summarizing his
findings in terms of the concepts of equipotentiality
and mass action.

Karl Spencer Lashley was born at Davis, West Virginia, on June 7, 1890. Even as a child he was interested
in animals, an interest which continued throughout his
adult life. His mother, Maggie Lashley, encouraged him
in intellectual pursuits. After studying at the University
of West Virginia and then taking a master’s degree in
bacteriology at the University of Pittsburgh, Lashley did
doctoral and postdoctoral research at Johns Hopkins
University. While at Hopkins, he was influenced by the
zoologist H. S. Jennings, the psychiatrist Adolf Meyer,
and the psychologist John B. Watson, the father of behaviorism.
Lashley was at once an experimental researcher and
a psychological theoretician. His investigations were
published in the leading journals and proceedings of
major scientific societies. After several joint studies
with Jennings, Lashley published his own thesis, “Inheritance in the Asexual Reproduction of Hydra.” He collaborated with Watson in studying behavior in seabirds,
acknowledging Watson’s behavioristic approach the rest
of his life.
Collaborating with Shepherd Ivory Franz, Lashley
produced several papers on the effects of cerebral destruction upon retention and habit formation in rats. This
was the beginning of his preoccupation with one of the
persistent problems in psychology, that of cerebral localization. Earlier researchers Gall, Broca, Fritsch and
Hitzig, Ferrier, and Munk were all believers in exact

Karl S. Lashley (UPI/Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with
permission.)

cerebral localization, whereas Flourens, Goltz, and Franz
doubted it. The culmination of his localization experiments was Brain Mechanisms and Intelligence: A Quantitative Study of Injuries to the Brain (1929), his longest,
most significant monograph. In it he summarized his
concepts of equipotentiality and mass action and marshaled the experimental evidence to support them. Thus
he accounted for the absence of precise and persistent localization of function in the cortex. Lashley’s experiments denied the simple similarity and correspondence,
previously assumed, between associationistic connectionism and the neuronal theory of the brain as a mass
of neurons connected by synapses.
In addition to his researches Lashley taught as professor of psychology at the universities of Minnesota and
Chicago and at Harvard University. He held various honorary positions and lectureships, was on the editorial
boards of numerous scientific journals, served as member of and adviser to governmental committees, and was
elected to many scientific and philosophical societies.
He died on August 7, 1958, in Poitiers, France.
Further Reading
Beach, Frank A. Karl Spencer Lashley. 1961.
Beach, Frank A., ed. The neuropsychology of Lashley. 1960.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

377

Law of efdfect

Law of effect

Arnold Allan Lazarus

A principle associated with learning and behavior
which states that behaviors that lead to satisfying
outcomes are more likely to be repeated than behaviors that lead to unwanted outcomes.

1932South African clinical psychologist who developed
a comprehensive psychotherapy called multimodal
therapy.

Psychologists have been interested in the factors
that are important in behavior change and control since
psychology emerged as a discipline. One of the first
principles associated with learning and behavior was the
Law of Effect, which states that behaviors that lead to
satisfying outcomes are likely to be repeated, whereas
behaviors that lead to undesired outcomes are less likely
to recur.

As a graduate student in psychology, Arnold
Lazarus first developed a therapy based on behavioral
psychology. He expanded this into cognitive behavior
therapy, and later into a multi-faceted psychotherapy
known as multimodal therapy. In recent years, Lazarus
has written popular psychology books. Lazarus has held
numerous professional positions and won many honors,
including the Distinguished Service Award of the American Board of Professional Psychology in 1982 and the
Distinguished Psychologist Award of the Division of
Psychotherapy of the American Psychological Association (APA) in 1992. In 1996 he became the first recipient of the Psyche Award of the Nicholas and Dorothy
Cummings Foundation. Lazarus is a professor emeritus
in the Graduate School of Applied and Professional Psychology at Rutgers University in Piscataway, New Jersey
and continues in private practice.

This principle, which most learning theorists accept
as valid, was developed by Edward Lee Thorndike, who
provided the basis for the field of operant conditioning.
Prior to Thorndike, many psychologists interested in animal behavior attributed learning to reasoning on the animal’s part. Thorndike instead theorized that animals
learn by trial and error. When something works to the animal’s satisfaction, the animal draws a connection or association between the behavior and positive outcome.
This association forms the basis for later behavior. When
the animal makes an error, on the other hand, no association is formed between the behavior that led to the error
and a positive outcome, so the ineffective behavior is
less likely to recur.
Initially, Thorndike drew parallels between positive
outcomes, which would be termed reinforcement s by
the behaviorists, and negative outcomes, which would be
referred to as punishments. Later, however, he asserted
that punishment was ineffective in removing the connection between the behavior and the result. Instead, he
suggested that, following a punishment, behavior was
likely to be less predictable.

Lazarus was born in Johannesburg, South Africa, in
1932, the son of Benjamin and Rachel (Mosselson)
Lazarus. Educated at the University of Witwatersrand in
Johannesburg, he earned his B.A. with honors in 1956,
his M.A. in 1957, and his Ph.D. in clinical psychology
in 1960. In 1956, he married Daphne Ann Kessel; they
have a son and a daughter.

Develops behavior therapy

Clifford, G. J. Edward L. Thorndike: The Sane Positivist. Middletown, PA: Wesleyan University Press, 1984.

In 1958, while still a graduate student, Lazarus
published a paper in the South African Medical Journal
describing a new form of psychotherapy that he called
behavior therapy. He began his private practice in psychotherapy in Johannesburg in 1959 and, in 1960, he became vice-president of the Transvaal Workers Educational Association. In 1963, Lazarus spent a year as a
visiting assistant professor of psychology at Stanford
University, and then returned to the University of Witwatersrand as a lecturer in psychiatry at the medical school.
In 1966, he returned to the United States as director of
the Behavior Therapy Institute in Sausalito, California.
That year he published Behavior Therapy Techniques
with Joseph Wolpe. The following year, he moved to
Temple University Medical School in Philadelphia as
professor of behavioral science. He was a visiting professor of psychology and director of clinical training at
Yale University in 1970.

Mackintosh, N. J. Conditioning and Associative Learning.
New York: Oxford University Press, 1983.

Lazarus was the first psychologist to apply desensitization techniques for treating phobias in group thera-

Thorndike also developed his Law of Exercise,
which states that responses that occur in a given situation
become more strongly associated with that situation. He
suggested that these two laws could account for all behavior. As such, psychologists had no need to refer to abstract thought in defining the way that behavior is
learned. Everything is associated with the effects of reward and punishment, according to Thorndike.
Further Reading

378

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Replaces behavior therapy with multimodal
therapy
In 1972, Lazarus received his diploma in clinical
psychology from the American Board of Professional
Psychology and returned to private practice in Princeton,
New Jersey. He also became professor and chairman of
the psychology department at Rutgers University in New
Brunswick, New Jersey. He joined the Rutgers Graduate
School of Applied and Professional Psychology in 1974.
As Lazarus examined long-term results in patients who
had undergone cognitive behavior therapy, he found
some inadequacies. For patients with anxiety and panic
disorders, obsessive-compulsive problems, depression,
and family and marital difficulties, the relapse rate following therapy remained very high. He therefore developed a multimodal therapy, which involves examining
and treating seven different but interrelated modalities,
or psychological parameters. These modalities are behavior, physiology, cognition, interpersonal relationships, sensation, imagery, and affect. Thus, multimodal
therapy involves a complete assessment of the individual
and treatments designed specifically for that individual.
Lazarus developed his approach, in part, by questioning
clients about the factors that had helped them in their
therapy. In 1976, Lazarus founded the Multimodal Therapy Institute in Kingston, New Jersey, and he continues
to direct that Institute. He established additional Multimodal Therapy Institutes in New York, Virginia, Pennsylvania, Illinois, Texas, and Ohio. His book Multimodal
Behavior Therapy was published in 1976.

encouraged people to stop repeating the same mistakes.
They argued that misconceptions, such as “life should be
fair,” lead to depression, anxiety, and feelings of guilt.
During his career, Lazarus has treated thousands of
clients, as individuals, couples, families, and groups. He
is a diplomate of the International Academy of Behavioral Medicine, Counseling, and Psychotherapy, and he
was elected to the National Academy of Practice in Psychology in 1982. Lazarus is the author or editor of fifteen books and more than 200 articles and book chapters
and has made video and sound recordings. He has served
on the editorial boards of numerous psychology journals.
Lazarus has been a fellow of the APA since 1972 and has
been on the board of Psychologists for Social Responsibility since 1982. He is a recipient of the Distinguished
Career Award from the American Board of Medical Psychotherapists and a fellow of the Academy of Clinical
Psychology.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Dryden, Windy. A Dialogue with Arnold Lazarus: “It Depends.” Philadelphia: Open University Press, 1991.
Labriola, Tony. Multimodal Therapy with Dr. Arnold Lazarus.
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon, 1998. Videorecording.
Lazarus, Arnold A. Marital Myths. San Luis Obispo, CA: Impact Publishers, 1985.
Lazarus, Arnold A. Relaxation Exercises. Guilford, CT: AudioForum, 1986. Sound cassettes.
Lazarus, Arnold A. Brief but Comprehensive Psychotherapy:
The Multimodal Way. New York: Springer, 1997.
Lazarus, Arnold A. and Clifford N. Lazarus. The 60-Second
Shrink: 101 Strategies for Staying Sane in a Crazy World.
San Luis Obispo, CA: Impact Publishers, 1997.
Zilbergeld, Bernie and Arnold A. Lazarus. Mind Power: Getting What You Want Through Mental Training. Boston:
Little, Brown, 1987.

Leadership

Joins the self-help movement
In 1975, Lazarus published his first popular selfhelp book, I Can If I Want To, with his colleague Allen
Fay. His 1977 book, In the Mind’s Eye: The Power of Imagery for Personal Enrichment, described the use of
mental imagery for personal growth. His recent popular
psychology writings include several books written with
his son, the psychologist Clifford Neil Lazarus. Their
1993 book with Allen Fay, Don’t Believe It for a
Minute!: Forty Toxic Ideas That Are Driving You Crazy,

The ability to take initiative in planning, organizing, and managing group activities and projects.

In any group of people, there are those who step forward to organize people and events to achieve a specific
result. In organized activities, leaders can be designated
and, in informal contexts, such as a party, they may
emerge naturally. What makes certain people into leaders
is open to debate. Luella Cole and Irma Nelson Hall
have written that leadership “seems to consist of a clus-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

379

Leadership

py sessions. With Arnold Abramovitz, he was the first to
use emotive imagery in treating children. He studied
treatments for alcoholism and was one of the first to
apply learning theory to the treatment of depression.
By the 1960s, it was clear to Lazarus that the therapy
movement he had initiated, utilizing the stimulus-response mechanisms of behaviorist psychology, was too
limited for effective psychotherapy. His 1971 book, Behavior Therapy and Beyond, laid the foundations for
what became known as cognitive-behavior therapy.

Learned helplessness

A study by T. Sharpe, M. Brown, and K. Crider
measured the effects of consistent positive reinforcement, favoring skills such as leadership, sportsmanship,
and conflict resolution, on two urban elementary physical education classes. The researchers found that the
focus on positive skills caused a significant increase in
leadership and conflict-resolution behavior. These results
seem to support the idea, discussed by Maynard, that
leadership behavior can be non-competitive (different individuals exercising leadership in different areas) and
also conducive to group cohesion.
Zoran Minderovic
Further Reading
Edwards, Cynthia A. “Leadership in Groups of School-Age
Girls.” Developmental Psychology 30, no. 6, (November
1994): 920-27.
Sharpe, T., M. Browne, and K. Crider. “The Effects of A
Sportsmanship Curriculum Intervention on Generalized
Positive Social Behavior of Urban Elementary School
Students.” Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis 28,
(1995): 401-16.

Martin Luther King, Jr. walking arm-in-arm with marchers,
leads a march on Washington, D.C. (National Archives and
Records Administration. Reproduced with permission.)

ter of traits, a few inborn but most of them acquired or
at least developed by contact with the environment.”
Psychologists have also defined leadership as a mentality, as opposed to aptitude, the assumption being that
mentalities can be acquired. Leaders can be “idea generators” or “social facilitators.” Leaders have their own
leadership style, and that style may not transfer from one
situation to another.
Child psychologists who study girls, and particularly
educators and parents advocating equal-opportunity education for girls, have remarked that girls with leadership
potential often have to struggle with various prejudices,
which also include the notion that leadership is a “male”
characteristic. In a study of 304 fourth-, fifth-, and sixgraders enrolled in 16 Girl Scout troops, Cynthia A. Edwards found that in an all-female group, leaders consistently display characteristic qualities such as organizational skills and independent thinking. Significantly, election
to leadership posts was based on perceived managerial
skills, while “feminine” qualities, such as empathic behavior, were generally not taken into account. However, in examining the research on mixed (male-female) groups, Edwards has found studies that show “that the presence of
male group members, even in the minority, suppresses the
verbal expression and leadership behavior of female group
members.” The fact that leadership behavior can be suppressed would seem to strengthen the argument that leadership is, indeed, a learned behavior.
380

Learned helplessness
An apathetic attitude stemming from the conviction that one’s actions do not have the power to affect one’s situation.

The concept of learned helplessness was developed
in the 1960s and 1970s by Martin Seligman (1942- ) at
the University of Pennsylvania. He found that animals
receiving electric shocks, which they had no ability to
prevent or avoid, were unable to act in subsequent situations where avoidance or escape was possible. Extending
the ramifications of these findings to humans, Seligman
and his colleagues found that human motivation to initiate responses is also undermined by a lack of control
over one’s surroundings. Further research has shown that
learned helplessness disrupts normal development and
learning and leads to emotional disturbances, especially
depression.
Learned helplessness in humans can begin very early
in life if infants see no correlation between actions and
their outcome. Institutionalized infants, as well as those
suffering from maternal deprivation or inadequate mothering, are especially at risk for learned helplessness due
to the lack of adult responses to their actions. It is also
possible for mothers who feel helpless to pass this quality
on to their children. Learned helplessness in children, as
in adults, can lead to anxiety or depression, and it can be

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In the course of studying learned helplessness in humans, Seligman found that it tends to be associated with
certain ways of thinking about events that form what he
termed a person’s “explanatory style.” The three major
components of explanatory style associated with learned
helplessness are permanence, pervasiveness, and personalization. Permanence refers to the belief that negative
events and/or their causes are permanent, even when evidence, logic, and past experience indicate that they are
probably temporary (“Amy hates me and will never be my
friend again” vs. “Amy is angry with me today”; “I’ll
never be good at math”). Pervasiveness refers to the tendency to generalize so that negative features of one situation are thought to extend to others as well (“I’m stupid”
vs. “I failed a math test” or “nobody likes me” vs. “Janet
didn’t invite me to her party”). Personalization, the third
component of explanatory style, refers to whether one
tends to attribute negative events to one’s own flaws or to
outside circumstances or other people. While it is important to take responsibility for one’s mistakes, persons suffering from learned helplessness tend to blame themselves
for everything, a tendency associated with low self-esteem and depression. The other elements of explanatory
style—permanence and pervasiveness—can be used as
gauges to assess whether the degree of self-blame over a
particular event or situation is realistic and appropriate.
Seligman believes it is possible to change people’s
explanatory styles to replace learned helplessness with
“learned optimism.” To combat (or even prevent) learned
helplessness in both adults and children, he has successfully used techniques similar to those used in cognitive
therapy with persons suffering from depression. These
include identifying negative interpretations of events,
evaluating their accuracy, generating more accurate interpretations, and decatastrophizing (countering the tendency to imagine the worst possible consequences for an
event). He has also devised exercises to help children
overcome negative explanatory style (one that tends toward permanent, pervasive, and personalized responses
to negative situations). Other resources for promoting
learned optimism in children include teaching them to
dispute their own negative thoughts and promoting their
problem-solving and social skills.
Seligman claims that parents can also promote
learned optimism in children who are too young for the
types of techniques outlined above by applauding and encouraging their mastery of new situations and letting them

have as much control as possible in everyday activities
such as dressing and eating. In addition, parents influence
the degree of optimism in their youngsters through their
own attitudes toward life and their explanatory styles,
which can be transmitted even to very young children.
Further Reading
Seligman, Martin. Helplessness: On Development, Depression,
and Death. New York: W.H. Freeman, 1975.
——— . Learned Optimism. New York: A.A. Knopf, 1991.
——— . The Optimistic Child. New York: HarperCollins,
1995.

Learning curve
The timeline of learning.

When a person is introduced to new information or a
new skill, it may take several learning sessions to acquire
that knowledge or skill. Psychologists refer to this acquisition process as the learning curve. In general, this term
refers to the time it takes an individual to develop knowledge or a new skill.
Behavioral psychologists have noted that the degree,
or strength, of learning reflects three factors. First, the
degree of learning is associated with the number of reinforcements received during the acquisition of the behavior. In animal research, these reinforcements may be
food pellets; in human research, the reinforcement may
simply be knowledge about the number of correct and
incorrect answers. In general, as the reinforcement increases, so does the performance level.
Second, there is a maximal level of performance associated with any behavior. This maximum is called the
asymptote. Once this asymptote is reached, no further
improvement in performance is possible.
Third, the greatest increase in the acquisition of the
behavior will occur in the initial phases of learning. As the
performance of the behavior approaches the asymptote,
there is increasingly less room for further improvement.
Psychologists often use graphs to depict learning
curves. The amount of practice at a task appears on the
horizontal axis; the strength or accuracy of a response is
recorded on the vertical axis. For a single individual, the
tendency is to improve over time or practice, although an
improvement may be temporarily followed by a decline
in performance.
When a large number of individuals are tested and
their average performance plotted, the learning curve
gives the appearance of a gradual, smooth improvement
over time. In the hypothetical learning curve in the accom-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

381

Learning curve

especially damaging very early in life, for the sense of
mastery over one’s environment is an important foundation for future emotional development. Learned helplessness can also hamper education: a child who fails repeatedly in school will eventually stop trying, convinced
that there is nothing he or she can do to succeed.

Learning disability

panying graph, phase one reflects a period of familiarization with the task in which little learning takes place. In
the second phase, there is a great deal of learning over a
short period of time. In the final phase, the degree of
learning is approaching asymptote, that is, the maximum.
Any further change in performance will be minimal.
Further Reading
Teplitz, Charles J. The Learning Curve Deskbook: A Reference
Guide to Theory, Calculations, and Applications. New
York: Quorum Books, 1991.

Learning disability
A disorder that causes problems in speaking, listening, reading, writing, or mathematical ability.

A learning disability, or specific developmental disorder, is a disorder that inhibits or interferes with the
skills of learning, including speaking, listening, reading,
writing, or mathematical ability. Legally, a learning disabled child is one whose level of academic achievement
is two or more years below the standard for his age and
IQ level. It is estimated that 5-20% of school-age children in the United States, mostly boys, suffer from learning disabilities (currently, most sources place this figure
at 20%). Often, learning disabilities appear together with
other disorders, such as attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD). They are thought to be caused by irregularities in the functioning of certain parts of the
brain. Evidence suggests that these irregularities are
often inherited (a person is more likely to develop a
learning disability if other family members have them).
However, learning disabilities are also associated with
certain conditions occurring during fetal development or
birth, including maternal use of alcohol, drugs, and tobacco, exposure to infection, injury during birth, low
birth weight, and sensory deprivation.
Aside from underachievement, other warning signs
that a person may have a learning disability include overall lack of organization, forgetfulness, and taking unusually long amounts of time to complete assignments. In
the classroom, the child’s teacher may observe one or
more of the following characteristics: difficulty paying
attention, unusual sloppiness and disorganization, social
withdrawal, difficulty working independently, and trouble switching from one activity to another. In addition to
the preceding signs, which relate directly to school and
schoolwork, certain general behavioral and emotional
features often accompany learning disabilities. These include impulsiveness, restlessness, distractibility, poor
physical coordination, low tolerance for frustration, low
382

self-esteem, daydreaming, inattentiveness, and anger
or sadness.

Types of learning disabilities
Learning disabilities are associated with brain dysfunctions that affect a number of basic skills. Perhaps
the most fundamental is sensory-perceptual ability—the
capacity to take in and process information through the
senses. Difficulties involving vision, hearing, and touch
will have an adverse effect on learning. Although learning is usually considered a mental rather than a physical
pursuit, it involves motor skills, and it can also be impaired by problems with motor development. Other basic
skills fundamental to learning include memory, attention, and language abilities.
The three most common academic skill areas affected by learning disabilities are reading, writing, and arithmetic. Some sources estimate that between 60-80% of
children diagnosed with learning disabilities have reading as their only or main problem area. Learning disabilities involving reading have traditionally been known as
dyslexia; currently the preferred term is developmental
reading disorder. A wide array of problems is associated with reading disorders, including difficulty identifying groups of letters, problems relating letters to sounds,
reversals and other errors involving letter position,
chaotic spelling, trouble with syllabication, failure to
recognize words, hesitant oral reading, and word-byword rather than contextual reading. Writing disabilities,
known as dysgraphia, include problems with letter formation and writing layout on the page, repetitions and
omissions, punctuation and capitalization errors, “mirror
writing,” and a variety of spelling problems. Children
with dysgraphia typically labor at written work much
longer than their classmates, only to produce large, uneven writing that would be appropriate for a much
younger child. Learning abilities involving math skills,
generally referred to as dyscalcula (or dyscalculia), usually become apparent later than reading and writing
problems—often at about the age of eight. Children with
dyscalcula may have trouble counting, reading and writing numbers, understanding basic math concepts, mastering calculations, and measuring. This type of disability may also involve problems with nonverbal learning,
including spatial organization.

Treatment
The principal forms of treatment for learning disabilities are remedial education and psychotherapy. Either may be provided alone, the two may be provided simultaneously, or one may follow the other. Schools are
required by law to provide specialized instruction for

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Learning disability
This eight-year old boy with a learning disability that causes him to write some of these numbers backwards. (Ellen B. Senisi.
Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

children with learning disabilities. Remediation may
take place privately with a tutor or in a school resource
center. A remediator works with the child individually,
often devising strategies to circumvent the barriers
caused by the disability. A child with dyscalcula, for example, may be shown a “shortcut” or “trick” that involves memorizing a spatial pattern or design and then
superimposing it on calculations of a specific type, such
as double-digit multiplication problems. The most important aspect of remediation is finding new ways to
solve old problems. In this respect, remediation diverges
from ordinary tutoring methods that use drill and repetition, which are ineffective in dealing with learning disabilities. The earlier remediation is begun, the more effective it will be. At the same time that they are receiving
remedial help, children with learning disabilities spend
as much time as possible in the regular classroom.
While remediation addresses the obstacles created by
the learning disability itself, psychotherapy deals with the
emotional and behavioral problems associated with the
condition. The difficulties caused by learning disabilities
are bound to affect a child’s emotional state and behavior.
The inability to succeed at tasks that pose no unusual

problems for one’s peers creates a variety of unpleasant
feelings, including shame, doubt, embarrassment, frustration, anger, confusion, fear, and sadness. These feelings
pose several dangers if they are allowed to persist over
time. First, they may aggravate the disability: excessive
stress can interfere with the performance of many tasks,
especially those that are difficult to begin with. In addition, other, previously developed abilities may suffer as
well, further eroding the child’s self-confidence. Finally,
destructive emotional and behavioral patterns that begin
in response to a learning disability may become entrenched and extend to other areas of a child’s life. Both
psychoanalytic and behaviorally oriented methods are
used in therapy for children with learning disabilities.
The sensitivity developed over the past two decades
to the needs of students with learning disabilities has extended to adults as well in some sectors. Some learning
disabled adults have been accommodated by special
measures such as extra time on projects at work. They
may also be assigned tasks that does not require a lot of
written communication. For example, a learning disabled
person might take customer service phone calls, rather
than reading and processing customer comment cards.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

383

Learning theory

Because there is no “cure” for learning disability, it
will continue to affect the lives of learning-disabled people, and the strategies they may have learned to succeed
in school must also be applied in their vocation.
Further Reading
Tuttle, Cheryl Gerson, and Gerald A. Tuttle, eds. Challenging
Voices: Writings By, For, and About People with Learning
Disabilities. Los Angeles: Lowell House, 1995.
Wong, Y.L., ed. Learning About Learning Disabilities. San
Diego: Academic Press, 1991.

Further Information
Association for Children and Adults with Learning Disabilities. 4900 Girard Rd., Pittsburgh, PA 15227–1444, (412)
881–2253.
National Center for Learning Disabilities. 99 Park Ave., New
York, NY 10016, (212) 687–7211.

Learning theory
Theory about how people learn and modify pre-existing thoughts and behavior.

Psychologists have suggested a variety of theories to
explain the process of learning. During the first half of
the 20th century, American psychologists approached the
concept of learning primarily in terms of behaviorist
principles that focused on the automatic formation of associations between stimuli and responses. One form of
associative learning— classical conditioning—is based
on the pairing of two stimuli. Through an association
with an unconditioned stimulus (such as meat offered to
a dog), a conditioned stimulus (such as a bell) eventually elicits a conditioned response (salivation), even when
the unconditioned stimulus is absent. Principles of classical conditioning include the extinction of the response if the conditioned and unconditioned stimuli
cease to be paired, and the generalization of the response
to stimuli that are similar but not identical to the original
ones. In operant conditioning, a response is learned because it leads to a particular consequence (reinforcement), and it is strengthened each time it is reinforced.
Positive reinforcement strengthens a response if it is presented afterwards, while negative reinforcement
strengthens it by being withheld. Once a response has
been learned, it may be sustained by partial reinforcement, which is provided only after selective responses.
In contrast to theories of classical and operant conditioning, which describe learning in terms of observable
behavior, intervening variable theories introduce such elements as memory, motivation, and cognition. Edward
Tolman demonstrated in the 1920s that learning can in384

volve knowledge without observable performance. The
performance of rats who negotiated the same maze on
consecutive days with no reward improved drastically
after the introduction of a goal box with food, leading to
the conclusion that they had developed “cognitive maps”
of the maze earlier, even in the absence of a reward, although this “latent learning” had not been reflected in
their observable behavior. Even earlier, Wolfgang Köhler, a founder of the Gestalt school of psychology, had argued for the place of cognition in learning. Based on experiments conducted on the island of Tenerife during
World War I, Köhler concluded that insight played a role
in problem-solving by chimpanzees. Rather than simply
stumbling on solutions through trial and error, the animals he observed seemed to demonstrate a holistic understanding of problems, such as getting hold of fruit that
was placed out of reach, by arriving at solutions in a sudden moment of revelation or insight.
The drive-reduction theory of Clark L. Hull and
Kenneth W. Spence, which became influential in the
1930s, introduced motivation as an intervening variable
in the form of homeostasis, the tendency to maintain
equilibrium by adjusting physiological responses. An
imbalance creates needs, which in turn create drives. Actions can be seen as attempts to reduce these drives by
meeting the associated needs. According to drive-reduction theory, the association of stimulus and response in
classical and operant conditioning only results in learning if accompanied by drive reduction.
In recent decades, cognitive theories such as those
of social learning theorist Albert Bandura have been influential. Bandura is particularly known for his work on
observational learning, also referred to as modeling or
imitation. It is common knowledge that children learn
by watching their parents, other adults, and their peers.
According to Bandura, the extent to which children and
adults learn behaviors through imitation is influenced
not only by the observed activity itself but also by its
consequences. Behavior that is rewarded is more readily
imitated than behavior that is punished. Bandura coined
the term “vicarious conditioning” for learning based on
the observed consequences of others’ actions, listing the
following requirements for this type of learning: attention to the behavior; retention of what is seen; ability to
reproduce the behavior; and motivation. Cognitive approaches such as Bandura’s have led to an enhanced understanding of how conditioning works, while conditioning principles have helped researchers better understand
certain facets of cognition.
Computers play an important role in current research on learning, both in the areas of computer-assisted learning and in the attempt to further understand the
neurological processes involved in learning through the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Bower, G. H., and E. Hilgard. Theories of Learning. 5th ed.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1981.
Grippin, Pauline. Learning Theory and Learning Outcomes:
The Connection. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1984.
Norman, D.A. Learning and Memory. San Francisco: Freeman,
1982.

Learning-to-learn
The phenomenon of greater improvement in speed
of learning as one’s experience with learning increases.

When people try to learn a new behavior, the first attempts are often not very successful. After a time, however, they seem to get the idea of the behavior and the
pace of learning increases. This phenomenon of greater
improvement in speed of learning is called learning-tolearn (LTL). There are two general reasons for the existence of LTL. First, negative transfer diminishes. When
people have learned to do something, they have often developed schemas or learning sets, that is, ways to approach those tasks. When a new behavior is required, old
approaches that may be irrelevant or that may get in the
way must be discarded. Learning becomes easier when
irrelevant or distracting behaviors disappear. Second,
there may be positive transfer of previous knowledge
that might be usefully applied to the situation.
Learning-to-learn is most obvious in tasks that are
somewhat complicated or varied. LTL occurs when the
learner realizes how the various components of an overall behavior fit together. When learners must deal with a
lot of information, they can develop the required higher
order principles that allow them to develop a general perspective on the behavior. As a result, subsequent learning
fits together because it fits in more naturally with the
person’s overall perspective. When the behavior to be
learned is simple, no such perspective is needed, so LTL
is less relevant.

Left-brain hemisphere
The hemisphere of the brain that specializes in
spoken and written language, logic, number skills,
and scientific concepts.

The left-brain hemisphere neurologically controls
the right side of the body and is connected to the rightbrain hemisphere by an extensive bundle of over a million nerve fibers called the corpus callosum. Scientific
study of the brain hemispheres dates back to the 1800s.
In the 1860s, French physician Paul Broca (1824-1880)
observed speech dysfunction in patients with lesions on
the left frontal lobes of their brains. Initially, the discovery of specialized functioning of the right and left sides
of the brain led to the assumption that all higher reasoning ability resided in the left-brain hemisphere, which
was thus regarded as dominant overall. The right-brain
hemisphere was thought to possess only lower-level capabilities and was considered subordinate to the leftbrain hemisphere.
Interest in the functions of the brain hemispheres
was revived in the 1960s, with Roger Sperry’s studies of
patients who had the corpus callosum severed to control
epileptic seizures. It was discovered that each hemisphere
of the brain specialized in performing certain types of
functions, a phenomenon now known as lateralization .
While the left-brain hemisphere performs functions involving logic and language more efficiently, the rightbrain hemisphere is more adept in the areas of music, art,
and spatial relations. Each hemisphere processes information differently; the left-brain hemisphere is thought to
function in a logical and sequential way; the right appears
to synthesize material simultaneously. These differences
can also be investigated in normal patients (in whom the
hemispheres are connected) by temporarily disabling a
single brain hemisphere with sodium amytal, a fast-acting
barbiturate, and by other means.
Lateralization varies considerably among individuals.
Two factors known to affect it are handedness and gender. In one experiment, almost all right-handed persons
were unable to speak when their left-brain hemispheres
were disabled. In contrast, the incidence decreased to 20
to 40 percent among left-handed people, indicating that
only this percentage had their speech centers located in
the left-brain hemisphere. Other left-handed subjects appear to use both hemispheres for speech. In general, each
gender is known to excel at certain lateralized functions:
women are more adept in language-based skills, perceptual fluency tasks (such as identifying matching terms rapidly), and arithmetic calculations. Men are generally more
proficient in envisioning and manipulating objects in
space. It has also been found that brain function in males
is more lateralized than in females. Men who have had
one brain hemisphere disabled are more debilitated than
similarly affected women. In particular, men display more
language difficulties than women when the left hemisphere is damaged. However, it is also known that the
sexes are more dependent on different areas of each hemi-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

385

Left-brain hemisphere

development of computer-based neural networks that can
simulate various forms of learning.

Kurt Lewin

sphere, so the assessment of function after damage also
depends on where the damage is localized. In addition,
conclusions about lateralization and gender are complicated by the fact that those functions at which members of a
particular gender appear to be more adept are often those
they are likely to have done more of (such as men manipulating tools), raising the question of environmental as opposed to biological factors.
When the left-brain hemisphere is damaged, the result is often severe aphasia—difficulty using or understanding spoken or written language. Damage localized
in the left temporal cortex can cause Wernicke’s aphasia,
which disturbs the ability to comprehend language. A different condition, called Broca’s aphasia, results from
damage to the left frontal cortex and interferes with a person’s ability to produce language. Persons affected with
this disorder experience halting speech, and they often
have difficulty recalling even the most familiar words.
Additional methods for studying brain hemispheres
include autopsies of cadavers that reveal the location of
brain lesions, observation of dysfunction in living patients with known brain lesions, and electrical stimulation of various areas of the brain. Biofeedback instruments have also contributed to the body of knowledge
about brain hemispheres; when wired to a research subject, they show a higher electrical discharge from
whichever hemisphere is active at a given point in time,
while recording alpha rhythms from an inactive hemisphere. Researchers have also made use of the discovery
that the eyes will typically move away from the more active hemisphere and toward the side of the body controlled by that hemisphere.
See also Brain

Kurt Lewin
1890-1947
American social psychologist who carried out researches that are fundamental to the study of the
dynamics and the manipulation of human behavior. He is the originator of field theory.

Kurt Lewin was born in Mogilno, Prussia, on September 9, 1899. He studied at the universities of Freiburg
and Munich and completed his doctorate at the University of Berlin in 1914. He taught in Berlin from 1921 until
the advent of Hitler to power in 1933, when he emigrated to the United States. He was visiting professor at
Stanford and at Cornell before receiving an appointment
as professor of child psychology in the Child Welfare
Research Station of the State University of Iowa in 1935.
386

In 1945 he left Iowa to start the Research Center for
Group Dynamics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He also served as visiting professor at the University of California, Berkeley, and at Harvard.
At Iowa, Lewin and his associates conducted notable research on the effect of democratic, autocratic,
and laissez-faire methods of leadership upon the other
members of groups. Largely on the basis of controlled
experiments with groups of children, Lewin maintained
that contrary to popular belief the democratic leader has
no less power than the autocratic leader and that the
characters and personalities of those who are led are
rapidly and profoundly affected by a change in social atmosphere. In effecting such changes on human behavior
patterns, Lewin argued, the democratic group that has
long-range planning surpasses both the autocratic and
laissez-faire groups in creative initiative and sociality. As
a general rule, he contended, the more democratic the
procedures are, the less resistance there is to change.
The central factors to be considered if one wishes to
transform a nondemocratic group into a democratic one
are ideology, the character of its members, and the locus
of coercive physical power within the group. Although
coercive physical power is thus not the only factor to be
considered, Lewin warns against the naive belief in the
goodness of human nature, which overlooks the fact that
ideology itself cannot be changed by teaching and moral
suasion alone. It can be done only by a change in the distribution of coercive physical power. But he also warns
that democratic behavior cannot be learned by autocratic
methods. The members of the group must at least feel that
the procedures are “democratic.”
Lewin was a Gestalt psychologist, and that approach
materially influenced him when he originated field theory. Strictly speaking, field theory is an approach to the
study of human behavior, not a theory with content which
can be used for explanatory, predictive, or control purposes. His work in this area has been judged as the single
most influential element in modern social psychology,
leading to large amounts of research and opening new
fields of inquiry. According to Lewin, field theory (which
is a complex concept) is best characterized as a method, a
method of analyzing causal relations and building scientific constructs. It is an approach which maintains that to
represent and interpret faithfully the complexity of concrete reality requires continual crossing of the traditional
boundaries of the social sciences, rather than a progressive narrowing of attention to a limited number of variables. The theory, which requires an interdisciplinary approach to the understanding of concrete reality, has also
been termed dynamic theory and topological psychology.
It holds that events are determined by forces acting on
them in an immediate field rather than by forces acting at

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

When Freud reformulated his theory of motivation
around 1920, he defined libido more broadly in terms of
opposed life and death instincts (Eros and Thanatos). Libido in this context is the source of the life instincts that
motivate not only sexuality and other basic drives but also
more complex human activities such as the creation of art.
Further Reading
Kurt Lewin (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

Freud, Sigmund. New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis. New York: W. W. Norton, 1933.
Hall, Calvin S. A Primer of Freudian Psychology. New York:
Harper and Row, 1982.

a distance. In the last analysis, it is a theory about theory
building, or a metatheory.
Lewin believed that a social scientist has an obligation to use his resources to solve social problems. He
helped found the Commission on Community Interrelations of the American Jewish Congress and the National
Training Laboratories. Shortly after his death on February 12, 1947, the Research Center for Group Dynamics
was moved to the University of Michigan, where it became one of two divisions of the Institute for Social Research and continued to exercise an important influence.
See also Gestalt psychology
Further Reading
Leeper, Robert W. Lewin’s topological and vector psychology:
a digest and a critique. 1943.
Marrow, Alfred Jay, The practical theorist: the life and work of
Kurt Lewin, New York: Teachers College Press, 1977.

Libido
In Freudian psychology, a term designating psychic
or sexual energy.

Lie detection
A procedure (or machine) designed to distinguish
truth-tellers from liars.

Because emotional states are often accompanied by
physiological arousal, researchers have often wondered
if physiological measurements could be used to detect
what a person is thinking or feeling. If you feel guilty for
telling a lie, are there physiological cues that will betray
you? The assumption that there are such cues forms the
basic rationale behind the polygraph test. It is assumed
that a guilty person will have increased autonomic
arousal in response to certain key questions, compared to
the arousal levels of an innocent person. In a conventional polygraph examination, GSR, blood pressure, and
heart rate are monitored. GSR refers to galvanic skin response. Sweating causes a brief drop in the electrical resistance of the skin. This resistance (the GSR) can be
measured by means of electrodes attached to the hand.
An arm band is used to measure blood pressure and
pulse rate. Thus the polygraph does not measure lying
directly, it measures the physiological responses that are

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

387

Lie detection

The term libido, which Sigmund Freud used as
early as 1894 and as late as the 1930s, underwent
changes as he expanded, developed, and revised his theories of sexuality, personality development, and motivation. In Freud’s early works, it is associated specifically with sexuality. Libido is central to the theory of psychosexual development outlined in Three Essays on the
Theory of Sexuality (1905). It is the energy that is repeatedly redirected to different erogenous zones throughout
the stages of pregenital sexuality (oral, anal, phallic) that
take place between birth and the age of about five years.
After the latency period, the libido reemerges in its mature manifestation at the genital stage that begins in adolescence. During all these permutations, the libido also
shifts from being primarily autoerotic and narcissistic to
being directed at a love object.

Lie detection
An early lie detector in use. (Archive Photos. Reproduced with permission.)

assumed to accompany lying. Does it work? Can the
polygraph help us distinguish between truth-tellers and
liars? Some psychologists maintain that it is both reliable
and valid, however this is a minority view. Most researchers dispute its usefulness—largely because no
physiological pattern of activity is a foolproof reflection
of deceit. There is a real danger that innocent people
could be misidentified as liars, simply because of high
anxiety triggered by a potentially incriminating question
(e.g., “Did you steal the car?”). Alternatively, accomplished liars may be able to lie without flinching.
Consider what could happen if a polygraph test
were administered to 1000 employees of a large department store, the owners of which are worried about employee theft. Let us assume that the test is 90% accurate
(a generous assumption). Most people do not steal from
their employers, so let us also assume that only 10% of
the 1000 employees are thieves. Of the 100 thieves, the
test will correctly identify 90% of them, assuming that
all 100 lie when administered the test. These 90 liars
could then be fired, and the costs of employee theft
would be reduced. But what about the honest people
who have not stolen anything? Of the 900 people who
388

told the truth, 90% of them will be correctly identified as
truth-tellers, but the other 10% will be misidentified as
liars. Ten percent of 900 is 90. In other words, the test
misidentifies 90 truth-tellers as liars, along with the original 90 who really did lie. At the end of the day, the store
owners have 180 people classified as liars, but only half
of them actually lied. If all 180 are fired, fully half of
them have been wrongfully dismissed. For obvious reasons, the preceding scenario would be totally unacceptable. Most courts in the United States and Canada do not
admit polygraph evidence in trials, and there are legal
prohibitions against using lie detectors to screen job applicants or randomly test employees.
In criminal investigations, the polygraph test can
sometimes be very helpful. If the police have information about a crime that would only be known to the perpetrator, the polygraph may reveal “guilty knowledge.”
Suppose a mugging victim was wearing a red sweater
and was robbed on the corner of 5th and Main. A series
of questions can be prepared, such as: “Was the victim
wearing a green sweater?”, “A yellow sweater?”, “A rain
coat?”, etc. An innocent person would have no knowledge of what the victim was wearing, thus patterns of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Timothy E. Moore
Further Reading
Iacono, W., and D. Lykken. “The scientific status of research
on polygraph techniques: The case against polygraph
tests.” In D. Faigman et al. (eds.). Modern scientific evidence: The law and science of expert testimony. St. Paul,
MN: West, 1997.
Saxe, L. “Detection of deception: Polygraph and integrity
tests.” Current directions in psychological science, 3,
(1994): 69-73.

bination of the two theories, while others search for new
alternatives, such as that proposed by J. Hughlings Jackson in 1973. Jackson claimed that the most basic skills
were localized but that most complex mental functions
combined these so extensively that the whole brain was
actually involved in most types of behavior.
Further Reading
Corballis, Michael C. The Lopsided Ape: Evolution of the Generative Mind. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Edwards, Betty. Drawing on the Right Side of the Brain. Los
Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1979.
Hampden-Turner, Charles. Maps of the Mind. New York: Collier Books, 1981.

Localization (sensory)
The ability of animals and humans to determine
the origin of a sensory input.

One of the highly developed abilities that humans
and other animals possess is the ability to determine
where a sensory input originates.

Localization (brain function)
Refers to the concept that different areas of the
brain control different aspects of behavior.

Theories of localization first gained scientific credence in the 1860s with Paul Broca’s discovery that
damage to a specific part of the brain—the left frontal
lobe—was associated with speech impairment. Other
discoveries followed: in 1874, Carl Wernicke identified
the part of the brain responsible for receptive speech
(the upper rear part of the left temporal lobe, known as
Wernicke’s area), and in 1870 Gustav Fritsch and J. L.
Hitzig found that stimulating different parts of the cerebral cortex produced movement in different areas of the
body. By the beginning of the twentieth century, detailed
maps were available showing the functions of the different areas of the brain.
Not all researchers have agreed with theories of localization, however. An influential conflicting view is the
equipotential theory, which asserts that all areas of the
brain are equally active in overall mental functioning.
According to this theory, the effects of damage to the
brain are determined by the extent rather than the location of the damage. Early exponents of this view—including Goldstein and Lashley—believed that basic
motor and sensory functions are localized, but that higher mental functions are not. There is still controversy between adherents of the localization and equipotential
theories of brain function. Some experts advocate a com-

The capacity to localize a sound, for example, depends on two general mechanisms. The first is relevant for
low frequency (i.e., low pitch) sounds and involves the
fact that sound coming from a given source arrives at our
ears at slightly different times. The second mechanisms
applies to high frequency (i.e., high pitch) sounds; if such
a sound comes from one side, one ear hears it more loudly
than the other and we can detect location based on differences in the loudness of the sound at each ear.
Low frequency sounds that come from the noisemaking source will enter the nearer ear first; these sound
waves will then bend around our head and arrive at the
far ear a short time later. If the sound is almost directly
in front of us, the sound arrives at one ear an extremely
short time ahead of its arrival at the other ear. Humans
can detect differences of perhaps 10 millionths of a second in arrival time. If the sound comes from the side, the
difference in time of arrival at the two ears is longer. In
either case, our brain executes quick computations to inform us about the location of the sound. Other animals,
like nocturnal owls, have shown greater sensitivity to
differences in time of arrival.
The second mechanism involves intensity differences in sound waves traveling to the ears. High frequency sound waves do not bend around the head like low
frequency waves. Instead, high frequency sound waves
tend to reflect off the surface of the head. As a consequence, a sound coming from one side of the head will
show greater intensity in one ear; that is, it will be slight-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

389

Localization (sensory)

physiological arousal would be similar across all questions. Similarly, questions about the location of the crime
scene would not be expected to show increased arousal
on the key question (e.g., “5th & Main?” versus “3rd &
Oak?”). An accused who answers “I don’t know” to all
questions, but who shows arousal only to the key questions may be indicating to the police that further investigation of that particular suspect is warranted.

John Locke

ly louder in one ear. The brain uses this intensity difference to tell us where a sound originates.
In general, we locate sounds below about 1500 Hz
(i.e., 1500 cycles per second) by analyzing differences in
time of arrival at each ear; above 1500 Hz, we use intensity differences. Sounds that are right around 1500 Hz
are hardest to localize. Further, we are likely to confuse
sounds that are directly in front of us, above us, and behind us because their positions are such that we cannot
use time of arrival and intensity differences.
Finally, sometimes we ignore the cues for sound localization if logic tells us that the sound should be coming from another direction. For example, when we listen
to somebody on a stage, we may hear the sounds they
produce from a loudspeaker that is above us. Nonetheless, we localize the sound as coming from the person on
the stage because it seems more logical. Psychologists
refer to this phenomenon as “visual capture.”
Further Reading
Corballis, Michael C. The Lopsided Ape: Evolution of the Generative Mind. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Hampden-Turner, Charles. Maps of the Mind. New York: Collier Books, 1981

In 1665, Locke traveled to the Continent as secretary to the English ambassador to the Brandenburg court.
Upon his return to England he chanced to medically attend Lord Ashley, First Earl of Shaftesbury, and later
lord chancellor of England. Their friendship and lifelong
association drew Locke into political affairs. He attended
Shaftesbury as physician and adviser, and in this latter
capacity Locke drafted The Fundamental Constitutions
of Carolina and served as secretary to the Board of
Trade. In 1676 Locke went to France for his health. An
inheritance from his father made him financially independent, and he remained in Montpellier for three years.
Locke rejoined Shaftesbury’s service, and when the
latter fled to Holland, the philosopher followed. He remained in exile from 1683 to 1689, and during these
years he was deprived of his studentship by express
order of Charles III. Most of his important writings were
composed during this period. After the Glorious Revolution of 1689 Locke returned to England and later served
with distinction as a commissioner of trade until 1700.
He spent his retirement at Oates in Essex as the guest of
the Mashams. Lady Masham was the daughter of Ralph
Cudworth, the philosopher. Locke died there on October
28, 1704.

Major works

John Locke
1632-1704
English philosopher and political theorist who attempted to center philosophy on an analysis of the
extent and capabilities of the human mind.

John Locke was born on August 29, 1632, in Wrington, in Somerset, where his mother’s family resided. She
died during his infancy, and Locke was raised by his father, who was an attorney in the small town of Pensford
near Bristol. John was tutored at home because of his always-delicate health and the outbreak of civil war in
1642. When he was 14, he entered Westminster School,
where he remained for six years. He then went to Christ
Church, Oxford. In 1658 he was elected a senior student
at his college. In this capacity he taught Greek and moral
philosophy. Under conditions at the time he would have
had to be ordained to retain his fellowship. Instead he
changed to another faculty, medicine, and eventually received a license to practice. During the same period
Locke made the acquaintance of Robert Boyle, the distinguished scientist and one of the founders of the Royal
Society, and, under Boyle’s direction, took up study of
natural science. Finally, in 1668, Locke was made a fellow of the Royal Society.
390

Locke, by virtue of his temperament and mode of
existence, was a man of great circumspection. None of
his major writings was published until he was nearly 60.
In 1690 he brought out his major works: Two Treatises
and the Essay Concerning Human Understanding . But
the four books of the Essay were the culmination of 20
years of intellectual labor. He relates that, together with a
few friends, probably in 1670, a discussion arose concerning the basis of morality and religion. The conclusion was that they were unable to resolve the question
until an investigation had been made to see “what objects
our understandings were or were not fitted to deal with.”
Thus the aim of this work is “to inquire into the origin,
certainty, and extent of human knowledge, together with
the grounds of belief, opinion, and assent.”
The procedure employed is what he called the “historical, plain method,” which consists of observations
derived from external sensations and the internal
processes of reflection or introspection. This psychological definition of experience as sensation and reflection
shifted the focus of philosophy from an analysis of reality to an exploration of the mind. The new perspective
was Locke’s major contribution, and it dominated European thought for at least two centuries. But if knowledge
consists entirely of experience, then the objects of cognition are ideas. The term “idea” was ambiguously defined

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

John Locke

by Locke as “whatsoever is the object of the understanding when a man thinks.” This broad use means that sensations, memories, imaginings, and feelings as well as
concepts are ideas insofar as they are mental. The danger
of Locke’s epistemology is the inherent skepticism contained in a technique which describes what is “in” the
mind. For if everything is an idea, then it is difficult to
distinguish between true and false, real and imaginary,
impressed sensations and expressed concepts. Thus
Locke, and the subsequent history of philosophy, had to
wrestle with the dilemma that a psychological description of the origin of ideas seriously undermines the extent of their objective validity.
Nonetheless the intention of the Essay was positive
in that Locke wished to establish the dependence of all
human knowledge upon everyday experience or sensation. The alternative theory of innate ideas is vigorously
attacked. Although it is not historically certain whether
anyone seriously maintained such a doctrine, Locke’s
general criticism lends indirect support to an experiential
view of knowledge. Innatism can be understood in a
naive way to mean that there are ideas of which we are
fully conscious at birth or which are universally acknowledged, so that the mind possesses a disposition to
think in terms of certain ideas. The first position is refuted by observation of children, and the second by the fact
that there are no acknowledged universal ideas to which
everyone agrees. The sophisticated version falls into
contradiction by maintaining that we are conscious of an
unconscious disposition.

Theory of knowledge
Having refuted the a priori, or nonexperiential, account of knowledge, Locke devotes the first two books
of the Essay to developing a deceptively simple empirical theory of knowledge. Knowing originates in external
and internal sources of sensation and reflection. The objects or ideas present to consciousness are divided into
simple and complex. Simple ideas are primitive sense
data, which the mind passively receives and cannot alter,
delivered by one sense (seeing blue), by several senses
(eating an orange as a synthesis of taste, touch, and
smell), by reflection (hunger), or by a combination of
sensation and reflection (pleasure and pain). The objective orientation of simple ideas follows from the fact that
we cannot add or subtract from their appearance or conception in the mind. In relation to simple ideas, at least,
the mind is passive, a “blank” or “white” tablet upon
which sensations are impressed. Complex ideas are
formed by actively combining, comparing, or abstracting
simple ideas to yield “modes, substances, and relations.”
Modes are class concepts or ideas that do not exist independently, such as beauty. Substance is a complex idea

John Locke (Rutgers University Library. Reproduced with
permission.)

of the unity of substrate of the simple qualities we perceive. And relations are the powers in objects capable of
causing minds to make comparisons, for example, identity and cause and effect. The difficulty is that complex
ideas do not relate to perceivable existents, but hopefully,
complex ideas do express elements or characteristics of
the real world.
Locke is faced with an acute dilemma. If the immediate object of knowledge is an idea, then man possesses
only a derivative knowledge of the physical world. To
know the real world adequately requires a complex idea
which expresses the relation between the qualities that
we perceive subjectively and the unperceived existent.
The substance which unites the common perceived qualities of figure, bulk, and color into this one existing
brown table is, in Locke’s terms, an “I don’t know what.”
His honesty almost brought Locke to a modern relational
definition of substance instead of the traditional notion
of a thing characterized by its properties. But the conclusion drawn in the Essay is that knowledge is relational;
that is, it consists in the perception “of the agreement or
disagreement among ideas.” For if Locke had argued that
knowledge expresses an adequation between the complex idea in the mind and the real object, then man
would have the power to go beyond ideas to the object

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

391

Locus of control

itself. But this is impossible, since every object is, by definition, an idea, and thus ironically, experiential knowledge is not about real objects but only about the perceived relations of ideas.
The third book of the Essay deals with words, and it
is a pioneer contribution to the philosophy of language.
Locke is a consistent nominalist in that for him language
is an arbitrary convention and words are things which
“stand for nothing but the ideas in the mind of the man
that has them.” Each man’s understanding can be confirmed by other minds insofar as they share the same linguistic conventions, although one of the singular abuses
of language results from the fact that we learn names or
words before understanding their use.
The purpose of Locke’s analysis is to account for
generalization, abstraction, and universals in terms of
language. Generalizations are the result of drawing, or
abstracting, what is common to many. In this sense, generalizations and universals are inventions of the mind
which concern only signs. But they have a foundation in
the similitude of things. And those class concepts which
have a fixed meaning and definition can be understood
as essences, but they are only nominal and not real. The
difference between our knowledge and reality is like that
between seeing the exterior of Big Ben and understanding how the clock works.
The final section of the Essay deals with the extent,
types, and divisions of knowledge. This work seems to
have been written earlier than the others, and many of its
conclusions are qualified by preceding material. The
agreement or disagreement of ideas, which constitutes
knowledge, consists of identity and diversity, perceived relations, coexistence or real existence known by way of intuition, and demonstration or sensation of a given existent.
In this view the actual extent of man’s knowledge is
less than his ideas because he does not know the real connections between simple ideas, or primary and secondary
qualities. Also, an intuitive knowledge of existence is limited to the self, and the only demonstrable existence is
that of God as an eternal, omnipotent being. With the exception of the self and God, all knowledge of existing
things is dependent upon sensation, whose cognitive status is “a little bit better than probability.” The poverty of
real knowledge is compensated to some extent by human
judgment, which presumes things to be true without actually perceiving the connections. And, according to
Locke’s commonsense attitude, the severe restrictions
placed upon knowledge merely reflect that man’s mental
capacity is suitable for his nature and condition.
Further Reading
Yolton, John W., ed. An essay concerning human understanding. 2 vols. 1961. rev. ed. 1965.
392

Laslett, Peter, ed. Two treatises of government. 1960.
Cranston, Maurice. John Locke: a biography. 1957.
Yolton, John W. John Locke and the way of ideas. 1956.
Kendall, Willmoore. John Locke and the doctrine of majority
rule. 1959.
Martin, Charles B. and D.M. Armstrong, eds. Locke and
Berkeley: a collection of critical essays. 1968.
Yolton, John W. John Locke: problems and perspectives: a collection of new essays. 1969.

Locus of control
A personality orientation characterized either by
the belief that one can control events by one’s own
efforts (internal locus of control) or that the future is
determined by forces outside one’s control (external locus of control).

If a person with an internal locus of control does
badly on a test, she is likely to blame either her own lack
of ability or preparation for the test. By comparison, a
person with an external locus of control will tend to explain a low grade by saying that the test was too hard or
that the teacher graded unfairly. The concept of locus of
control was developed by psychologist Julian Rotter,
who devised the Internal-External Locus of Control
Scale (I-E) to assess this dimension of personality.
Studies have found that this test is a valid predictor of
behavior typically associated with locus of control.
Links have been found between locus of control and
behavior patterns in a number of different areas. People
with an internal locus of control are inclined to take responsibility for their actions, are not easily influenced by
the opinions of others, and tend to do better at tasks
when they can work at their own pace. By comparison,
people with an external locus of control tend to blame
outside circumstances for their mistakes and credit their
successes to luck rather than to their own efforts. They
are readily influenced by the opinions of others and are
more likely to pay attention to the status of the opinionholder, while people with an internal locus of control pay
more attention to the content of the opinion regardless of
who holds it. Some researchers have claimed that “internals” tend to be more intelligent and more success-oriented than “externals.” In the elementary grades, children with an internal locus of control have been found to
earn higher grades, although there are conflicting reports
about whether there is a relationship between college
grades and locus of control. There is also a relationship
between a child’s locus of control and his or her ability
to delay gratification (to forgo an immediate pleasure or
desire in order to be rewarded with a more substantial
one later). In middle childhood, children with an inter-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Although people can be classified comparatively as
“internals” or “externals,” chronological development
within each individual generally proceeds in the direction of an internal locus control. As infants and children
grow older they feel increasingly competent to control
events in their lives. Consequently, they move from
being more externally focused to a more internal locus.
Further Reading
Bem, Allen P. Personality Theories. Boston: Allyn and Bacon,
1994.
Burger, Jerry M. Personality. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole
Publishing Company, 1993.

Logical thinking
The ability to understand and to incorporate the
rules of basic logical inference in everyday activities.

Regarded as a universal human trait, the ability to
think logically, following the rules of logical inference,
has traditionally been defined as a higher cognitive skill.
The field of cognitive child psychology was dominated
for more than half a century by the Swiss philosopher
and psychologist Jean Piaget, whose studies are considered fundamental. Piaget identified four stages of cognitive development. During the sensory-motor stage (ages
0-2), the child learns to experience the world physically
and attains a rudimentary grasp of symbols. In the preoperational stage (ages 2-7), symbols are used, but thought
is still “preoperational,” which means that the child does
not understand that a logical, or mathematical, operation
can be reversed. The concrete operations stage (ages 6
or 7-11) ushers in logical thinking; children, for instance,
understand principles such as cause and effect. The formal operations stage (12-adulthood), introduces abstract
thinking (i.e., thought operations that do not need to relate to concrete concepts and phenomena).
Logical thinking, in Piaget’s developmental scheme,
is operational, which means that it does not appear before the concrete operations stage. While students of
child cognition generally agree with Piaget’s developmental milestones, subsequent research in the area has
led researchers to question the idea that some logical
thinking cannot appear in the preoperational stage. For
example, Olivier Houdè and Camilo Charron tested a

group of 72 children between the ages of five and eight,
giving them various tasks related to classes of objects,
and found that children who could not perform extensional logic tasks were nevertheless able to practice intensional logic. (Intension defines the properties of a
class, while extension determines who or what can be a
member of a particular class; if the intension of a class is
“red objects,” the extension will include any particular
object that happens to be red.) However, Piaget knew
that preoperational children could practice intensional
logic, but, in his view, incomplete logical thought was,
by definition, pre-logical. For example, children who understand the meaning (intensionality) of a “red objects”
class may decide not to include certain red objects—for
reasons that the experimenter would define as illogical
(e.g.: “it’s too little”).
Houdè and Charron have identified an “operational
proto-logic” in children whom Piaget would define as
pre-logical. Instead of arbitrarily promoting purely intensional thinking to the rank of full-fledged (extensional
and intensional) logical thought, Houdè and Charron decided to investigate the mental processes underlying
seemingly illogical behavior. In a series of experiments
involving children aged five to eight, a group straddling
the pre-operational/operational boundary, the two researchers focused on the intensional logicians who failed
the extensional logic (inclusion). Clearly, the act of not
including some red object in the “red objects” class was,
in a strictly Piagetian sense, illogical, or, more precisely,
illogical behavior, but was that behavior determined by
irrational thinking? To their surprise, they found, particularly in a modified form of the “partition” experiment
(Piaget and Garcia, 1987), that, when shown the drawing
of a circle (B) divided into two by a line (the two subclasses being A and A’), A’ may be ignored as a subclass
of B, not because of illogical thinking, but because A is
more compelling from the point of view of perception.
According to Pascual-Leone (Pascual-Leone, 1988),
there is a misleading scheme underlying the perception
of B, and a subclass is excluded. According to Houdè
and Charron, the child understands the intensional logic,
or meaning, of the “red objects” class, but stumbles at
the extensional, or inclusion, level because of perceptual
factors. Thus, the undeniable Piagetian shift, around the
age of seven years, from non-inclusive to inclusive behavior does not indicate a quantum leap from pre-logical
to logical thinking, but, rather, reflects the presence of an
inhibiting mechanism, whereby the confusing effect of
perception on cognition is neutralized. Thus, as Houdè
and Charron have remarked, a non-inclusive six-year-old
may have an inefficient inhibiting mechanism. These
findings, although suggesting a continuum model of cognitive development, as opposed to the Piagetian idea of a

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

393

Logical thinking

nal locus of control are relatively successful in the delay
of gratification, while children with an external locus of
control are likely to make less of an effort to exert selfcontrol in the present because they doubt their ability to
influence events in the future.

Longitudinal study

quantum leap from pre-logical to logical thinking, does
not, in fact question the foundations of Piaget’s essentially developmental theory of cognition. Piaget himself, in
his search for the origins of logical thinking, studied
very young children, ever mindful of the relevance of
other mental, and non-mental, factors and processes to
the emergence of logical thought. Finally, Piaget’s work
was the foundation from which emerged the insight, corroborated by empirical observation, that the very young
child is already a logician.
Philosophers specializing in the study of childhood
have found that the logical repertoire of young children
is not limited to intensional logic. Many utterances made
by children, particularly statements involving the concepts of possibility and necessity, exhibit a grasp, albeit
rudimentary, of modal logic, i.e., the branch of logic
which formulates rules for propositions about possibility
and necessity (Matthews, 1980). The fact that the discourse of young children fits easily into the formal context of modal logic, which is related to intensional logic,
indicates that the children’s logical aptitude may yield
new surprises. Building on the rich legacy of Piaget’s
work, researchers have significantly expanded the field
of cognitive development, gaining critical insights which
will further elucidate the human paradigm. The crucial
relevance of Piagetian and post-Piagetian studies for the
inquiry concerning logical thinking in children lies in the
fact that these studies have shed light on the important
role played by non-logical, and non-mental, factors in
the formation of logical thought.
Zoran Minderovic
Further Reading
Inhelder, Bärbel, and Jean Piaget. The Early Growth of Logic
in the Child: Classification and Seriation. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1964.
Matthews, Gareth B. Philosophy and the Young Child. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1980.
Pascal-Leone, J. “Organismic Processes for Neo-Piagetian
Theories: A Dialectical Causal Account of Cognitive Development.” In The Neo-Piagetian Theories of Cognitive
Development: Toward an Integration. A. Demetriou, ed.
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1988.

Longitudinal study
Research method used to study changes over time.

Researchers in such fields as developmental psychology use longitudinal studies to study changes in in394

dividual or group behavior over an extended period of
time by repeatedly monitoring the same subjects. In longitudinal research, results are recorded for the same
group of subjects, referred to as a cohort, throughout the
course of the study.
An example of a longitudinal study might be an examination of the effects of preschool attendance on later
school performance. The researchers would select two
groups of children—one comprised of children who attend preschool, and the other comprised of children who
had no preschool experience prior to attending kindergarten. These children would be evaluated at different
points during their school career. The longitudinal study
allows the researcher to focus on these children as they
mature and record developmental patterns across time. A
disadvantage of the longitudinal study is that researchers
must be engaged in the study over a period of years and
risk losing some of their research subjects, who may discontinue their participation for any number of reasons.
Another disadvantage of the longitudinal study reflects
the fact that some of the changes or behaviors observed
during the study may be the effects of the assessment
process itself. In addition to the longitudinal study, some
researchers may employ the cross-sectional study
method. In this method, the subjects, or cohort, are
drawn from different groups and are studied at the same
point in time.

Konrad Lorenz
1903-1989
Austrian behaviorist and early leader in the field of
ethology.

Konrad Lorenz played a lead role in forging the field
of ethology, the comparative study of animal behavior,
and helped regain the stature of observation as a recognized and respected scientific method. Along the way,
his observations—particularly of greylag geese —led to
important discoveries in animal behavior. Perhaps his
most influential determination was that behavior, like
physical traits, evolves by natural selection. In one of
his many books, On Aggression, he wrote, “Historians
will have to face the fact that natural selection determined the evolution of cultures in the same manner as it
did that of species.” In 1973, he and two other ethologists jointly accepted the Nobel Prize for physiology or
medicine for their behavioral research. Born on November 7, 1903, in Vienna, Austria, Lorenz was the younger
of two sons born to Adolf Lorenz and his wife and assistant, Emma Lecher. His father was an orthopedic sur-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Konrad Lorenz

geon whose new hip-joint operation brought him renown
on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean. The young Konrad
Lorenz received his schooling in Vienna at a private elementary school and at the Schottengymnasium, one of
the city’s best secondary schools. But his love of animals
began outside of school, primarily at the family’s summer home in Altenberg, Austria. Lorenz’s parents indulged his interests, allowing him to have many pets as a
youth. His interests became more grounded in science
when he read about Charles Darwin’s evolutionary theory at the age of 10.
Although Lorenz had an apparent interest in animals,
his father insisted he study medicine. In 1922, Lorenz
began premedical training at Columbia University in
New York but returned early to Austria to continue the
program at the University of Vienna. Despite his medical
studies, Lorenz found time to informally study animals.
He also kept a detailed diary of the activities of his pet
bird Jock, a jackdaw. In 1927, his career as an animal behaviorist was launched when an ornithological journal
printed his jackdaw diary. During the following year, he
received an M.D. degree from the University of Vienna
and became an assistant to a professor at the anatomical
institute there. Lorenz recalled that period in his 1982
book The Foundations of Ethology: “When studying at
the university under the Viennese anatomist, Ferdinand
Hochstetter, and after I had become thoroughly conversant with the methodology and procedure of phylogenetic
(evolutionary) comparison, it became immediately clear
that the methods employed in comparative morphology
were just as applicable to the behavior of the many
species of fish and birds I knew so thoroughly, thanks to
the early onset of my love for animals.” His interests led
him to study zoology at the University of Vienna, and in
1933, Lorenz earned his Ph.D. in that field.

Spends “goose summers” in Altenberg
Lorenz then turned to animal behavior research for
several years. It was during this time, 1935–38, that
Lorenz developed the theories for which he is best
known. He spent what he called his “goose summers” at
the Altenberg home, concentrating on the behavior of
greylag geese and confirming many hypotheses that he
had formed while observing his pet birds. In his later
book The Year of the Greylag Goose, Lorenz explains that
he studied greylag geese for “many reasons, but the most
important is that greylag geese exhibit a family existence
that is analogous in many significant ways to human family life.” While working with the geese, Lorenz developed
the concept of imprinting. Imprinting occurs in many
species, most noticeably in geese and ducks, when—
within a short, genetically set time frame—an animal will
accept a foster mother in the place of its biological moth-

Konrad Lorenz (UPI/Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with
permission.)

er, even if that foster mother is a different species. Lorenz
raised goslings which, deprived of their parents and confronted instead with Lorenz, accepted him and attached
themselves to him as they normally would to their mother. Lorenz has often been photographed in Altenberg
walking down a path or rowing across the water with a
string of goslings following, single-file, behind him. He
similarly found that mallard ducks would imprint on him,
but only when he quacked and presented a shortened version of himself by squatting. While he enjoyed his close
contact with animals, it did present some awkward situations. On one occasion, while walking his ducklings,
which were hidden in the tall grass behind him, he
stopped quacking for a minute and looked up from his
squatted position to see a group of tourists quizzically
watching from beyond the fence.
In addition he and Nikolaas Tinbergen, future Nobel
Prize cowinner, developed the concept of the innate releasing mechanism. Lorenz found that animals have instinctive behavior patterns, or fixed-action patterns, that
remain dormant until a specific event triggers the animal
to exhibit this behavior for the first time. The fixed-action pattern is a specific, ordered series of behaviors,
such as the fighting and surrender postures used by many
animals. He emphasized that these fixed-action patterns

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

395

KonradLorenz

are not learned but are genetically programmed. The
stimulus is called the “releaser,” and the nervous system
structure that responds to the stimulus and prompts the
instinctive behavior is the innate releasing mechanism.

can tell us the most beautiful stories and that means true
stories, because the truth about nature is always far more
beautiful even than what our great poets sing of it, and
they are the only real magicians that exist.”

In The Foundations of Ethology, Lorenz explained
that animals have an “innate schoolmarm” that reinforces useful behavior and checks harmful behavior
through a feedback apparatus. “Whenever a modification
of an organ, as well as of a behavior pattern, proves to be
adaptive to a particular environmental circumstance, this
also proves incontrovertibly that information about this
circumstance must have been ‘fed into’ the organism.”
This information can take one of two routes: learning, or
genetic programming.

Lorenz writes that he was prompted to pen King
Solomon’s Ring by an occasion when his assistant and
friend Dr. Alfred Seitz and he were working on a film
about the greylag geese. Seitz was trying to call in some
ducklings and accidentally used the language of the
geese. When he realized his error, Seitz apologized to the
ducklings before switching to their quacking. Lorenz recalls in the book, “it was at that very moment that the
thought of writing a book first crossed my mind. There
was nobody to appreciate the joke, Alfred being far too
preoccupied with his work. I wanted to tell it to somebody and so it occurred to me to tell it to everybody.”

Lorenz later devised a hydraulic model to explain an
animal’s motivation to perform fixed-action patterns. In
this model, he explained that energy for a specific action
accumulates either until a stimulus occurs or until so
much energy has built up that the animal displays the
fixed-action pattern spontaneously. He witnessed the
spontaneous performance of a fixed-action pattern first
when, as a boy, he watched his pet starling suddenly fly
off its perch to the ceiling of the room, snap at the air in
the same way it would snap at an insect, then return to
beat the “insect” on the perch, and finally swallow.
These exciting years for Lorenz did not go without
controversy. He wrote a paper, “Disorders Caused by the
Domestication of Species-Specific Behavior,” which
some critics felt contained a strong Nazi flavor in its
word choice. While Lorenz repeatedly condemned Nazi
ideology, many still believed the paper reflected a proNazi stance; he had to weather many criticisms.

Tells of his life with animals
While the research continued, Lorenz accepted an
appointment in 1937 as lecturer in comparative anatomy
and animal psychology at the University of Vienna. In
1940, he became professor of psychology at the University of Konigsberg in Germany but a year later answered
the call to serve in the German Army. In 1944, Lorenz
was captured by the Russians and sent to a prison camp.
It was not until 1948 that he was released. Upon his return, Lorenz went back to the University of Vienna before accepting a small stipend from the Max Planck Society for the Advancement of Science to resume his studies at Altenberg. By 1952, Lorenz had published a popular book King Solomon’s Ring, an account of animal
behavior presented in easily understood terminology. Included in the book are many of his often-humorous experiences with his study subjects. The book also includes
a collection of his illustrations. As he writes in the book:
“Without supernatural assistance, our fellow creatures
396

In 1955, with the increased support of the Max
Planck society, Lorenz, ethologist Gustav Kramer, and
physiologist Erich von Holst established and then codirected the Institute for Behavioral Physiology in
Seewiesen, Bavaria, near Munich. During the ensuing
years at Seewiesen, Lorenz again drew attention, this
time for the analogies he drew between human and animal behavior—which many scientists felt were improper—and his continuing work on instinct. The latter work
gave further support to ethologists who believed that the
innate behavior patterns found in animals evolved
through natural selection, just as anatomical and physiological characters evolved. This drew arguments from
many animal psychologists who contended that all behavior is learned.
Following the deaths of codirectors von Holst and
Kramer, Lorenz became the sole director of the
Seewiesen institute in 1961. In 1966, Lorenz again faced
some controversy with his book On Aggression. In the
book, Lorenz describes aggression as “the fighting instinct in beast and man which is directed against members of same species.” He writes that this instinct aids the
survival of both the individual and the species, in the latter case by giving the stronger males the better mating
opportunities and territories. The book goes on to state
that animals—particularly animals that can inflict severe
damage to one another with sharp canines or horns—will
use rank, territory, or evolved instinctual behavior patterns to avoid actual violence and fatalities. Lorenz says
only humans purposefully kill each other—a fact that he
attributes to the development of artificial weapons outpacing the human evolution of killing inhibitions. Critics
say the book’s conclusions encourage the acceptance of
violence in human behavior. On Aggression is an example of Lorenz’s shift in the 1960s from solely animal behavior to include human social behavior.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In 1973, Lorenz, Tinbergen, and Karl Frisch, who
studied bee communication, jointly accepted the Nobel
Prize for their behavioral research. In the same year,
Lorenz retired from his position as director of the
Seewiesen institute. He then returned to Altenberg where
he continued writing and began directing the department
of animal sociology at the Austrian Academy of Science.
In addition, the Max Planck Society for the Promotion of
Science set up a research station for him at his ancestral
home in Altenberg. In 1978, Lorenz gave a more personal view of his work with his picturebook The Year of the
Greylag Goose. As he begins the volume: “This is not a
scientific book. It would be true to say that it grew out of
the pleasure I take in my observations of living animals,
but that is nothing unusual, since all my academic works
have also originated in the same pleasure. The only way
a scientist can make novel, unexpected discoveries is
through observation free of any preconceived notions.”
In 1927, the same year his career-launching diary
was published, Lorenz married childhood friend Margarethe “Gretl” Gebhardt, a gynecologist. They had two
daughters, Agnes and Dagmar, and a son, Thomas.
Lorenz was 85 years old when he died February 27,
1989 of kidney failure at his home in Altenburg, Austria.
See also Imprinting

personal reactions to a loss, independent of expected cultural standards.

The emotional process of grieving
Everyone’s grief is personalized, although most people share many of the same feelings. There is no order or
schedule to grieving. The process may take a few days or
years. Grieving that goes on and on, such a chronic grieving resulting in severe depression, or being stuck in a
certain phase of the process, like denial, is considered to
indicate pathological grief, and may require intervention
by a trained professional. Other signs of pathological
grief include extreme guilt feelings, irrational feelings of
responsibility for the loss, and excessive despondency.
How people cope with life in general often indicates
how they will deal with loss. Some coping behaviors are:
avoidance of painful stimuli, or triggers, (such as photographs, favorite restaurants, clothing that smells like
the loved one); distraction, such as keeping busy with
work; “filling up” the empty space with drugs or food or
alcohol; obsessing or thinking a lot about the details of
the death; impulsive behavior like moving or quitting
work; praying; intellectualizing or thinking about the
loss without being emotional; and attaching to other people. While these coping skills may help a person feel better until they are able to reconstruct their lives without
the object of the loss.

Leslie Mertz

Most psychologists identify the stages of grief and
suggest that the typical emotional process of most people
is as follows.

Evans, Richard I., Konrad Lorenz: The Man and His Ideas,
Harcourt, 1975.
Nisbett, Alec, Konrad Lorenz, Harcourt, 1976.
Nisbett, Alec, Nobel Prize Winners, Wilson, 1987, pp. 645–47.
Nisbett, Alec, Time, (March 13, 1989): B6.
Nisbett, Alec, Washington Post, (March 1, 1989).

Initially, a person may feel numbness, shock, and/or
disbelief. A sudden change in reality occurs when someone dies. Even if the death was expected, in the case of
an extended illness, and there was anticipatory grief, or
grieving before the event happened, there can still be disbelief that the person is actually gone. There may be a
sense of being distant or paralyzed. Some psychologists
say that this is a way of protecting oneself from being
overwhelmed. People’s reactions vary widely and while
one person may feel listless and introverted, withdrawn
and reflective, another person may burst out crying and
be unable to accept that their loved one is gone. Some
denial is acute, while others are more subconscious, like
“accidentally” setting that person’s place at the table, or
hearing the deceased’s car in the garage. Most people
pass through the denial stage fairly quickly and accept
that the deceased is not coming back.

Further Reading

Loss and grief
Loss, a state of being without, is usually accompanied by grief, which is an emotional state of intense
sadness and a reaction to the disruption of attachment.

There are many kinds of loss and each has its own
kind of grief. People lose loved ones like spouses, partners, children, family members, and friends. Even pet
losses can cause grief. Job or property loss can be
painful. Mourning is the conventional cultural behavior
for those experiencing a loss. Grief reactions are those

Once the death has been accepted as real, the
process of healing begins. Now a person can enter into
the emotions of grief. People who have survived a loss
may be preoccupied with thoughts about the deceased. A
person may feel angry about their loss, or guilty that

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

397

Loss and grief

Accepts nobel prize for behavioral research

Loss and grief

move past grief. In the final stages of grieving, a people
re-establish themselves, let go of the deceased or reconciles with the loss, and begin to live in the present as opposed to the past or the transition of grief process.

Physical symptoms of grief
Sighing, sobbing, crying, and weeping are common
and normal physical signs of grief. Some psychological
studies show that these forms of feeling are necessary
physical release of stress and sadness mechanisms. Stress
and sadness that are not relieved arise in other physical
effects like, not being able to pay attention to present experience, lack of concentration, poor memory, disrupted
sleep patterns like insomnia, little or no appetite, abusing
drugs or alcohol, and/or thoughts of suicide.
Psychologists and medical doctors have identified
some common physical symptoms of grieving which include: tightness in the throat, a choking or suffocating
feeling, shortness of breath, sighing, empty stomach
feeling, lack of muscular power, tension, pain, and absent mindedness. These are physiological and/or biochemical reactions. Grief can have major physical health
consequences. There can be (especially among older
people) compromised immune function, increased hospitalization or surgeries, and/or increased mortality rates.

Different kinds of losses
Columbine High School students in Colorado grieving for
their lost classmates. (Photo by David Zalubowski. AP/Wide
World Photos. Reproduced with permission.)

they’ve survived the deceased. For some people there are
unresolved issues, or regrets, that come up, like having
had a disagreement as last words, or having kept a secret.
Some people get depressed, feel hopeless, and believe
that they cannot go on. Others experience anxiety. The
risk of suicide is a real concern in some situations. Some
people re-evaluate their own lives as a result of the loss.
As a person processes through his or her emotions
and deals with the changes brought on by the loss, he/she
begins to reorganize, re-build, and re-invest energy into
different attachments. Loss of a loved one may change a
person’s entire social support framework. A person may
have to acquire new skills to move on. For instance, married women who were financially dependent upon husbands may have to become financially educated. Partners
who relied on the deceased for emotional support must
find that support elsewhere. Children who have lost parents must look to other role models. Although loss leaves
permanent marks on someone’s life, most people do
398

All loss can be painful and different kinds of losses
bring up particular issues. For instance, a child’s death
brings up grief about the loss of what the future might
have brought and a feeling of the loss of innocence. Parents may also feel like major parts of themselves are
gone and feel overwhelmingly guilty for surviving their
child.
Losing someone to suicide or a drug overdose can
be confusing and shocking. Survivors often feel guilty,
shameful, helpless, and angry. Multiple losses are also
more complex. People who have lost a group of friends
or a number of family members, or who have witnessed
a mass loss, may feel strong urges of wanting to go too,
or guilt for being a survivor. Others, like people who
have lost many loved ones to AIDS or old-age, must contend with separate issues of becoming desensitized to
loss, or feeling completely isolated.

Therapies and tasks of grieving
Millions of people work through grief without therapy, but it can be invaluable to have psychological counseling during times of major stress. Understanding
friends and family can be essential in these times. Support groups may also prove beneficial.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Psychologists have many specialized ways of dealing with grief. Sometimes they suggest that a client write
a letter to the deceased, or they may use psychoanalysis
in order to aid in the detachment process. Traditional
cultural and/or religious customs may help, too. For psychologists the core of their job in helping someone
grieve is: reaching out, being a physical presence, being
empathic and providing emotional support, giving permission to grieve, making sure the griever doesn’t isolate
him or herself, and assessing the grief so as to help the
process along.
Dealing with grief or helping someone deal with
grief-work involves taking the steps of the grief stages.
Accepting and facing the reality of loss, functioning in a
healthy way like eating right and sleeping well, working
through the pain of memories and missing someone,
dealing with all the emotions that arise, coping with social and life changes brought on by the loss, detaching
from the deceased, accepting support, re-investing energy, letting go, and making a new identity for oneself
which includes having lost someone and being a survivor.

Kastenbaum, Robert J. Death, society, and human experience.
New York, Oxford, Singapore, Sydney: Maxwell Macmillan International Publishing Group, 1991.
Kato, Pamela M. and Traci Mann. “A synthesis of psychological interventions for the bereaved.” Clinical Psychology
Review, vol. 19, no. 3, 275-296, 1999.
Rando, Therese A. Grief, dying, and death: clinical interventions for caregivers. Illinois: Research Press Company,
1984.

Further Information
National Mental Health Association. 1021 Prince Street,
Alexandria, VA, USA. 22314, 800-969-6642.
http://www.nmha.org.
Grief Recovery Institute. 8306 Wilshire Blvd., Beverly Hills,
CA, USA. 90211, 800-445-4808.
Self Help & Psychology Magazine.
http://shpm.com/articles/loss/griefcontinuum.html.
The Grief Continuum: Three Stages of Grief Work.
http://shpm.com/articles/loss/griefcontinuum.html.

Aleksandr Romanovich Luria
Russian psychologist who conducted groundbreaking work on brain function.
1902-1977

Aleksander Luria’s research on normal versus abnormal brain function was critically important in the understanding of how to approach brain injuries. Through his
work, much was learned about the impact of head injuries,
brain tumors, and the effects of mental retardation. He
also studied brain activity among children in an attempt to
understand how to minimize abnormal behavior.

Further Reading

Luria was borm in Kazan, Russia, on July 16, 1902,
where he attended local schools. He went on to the University of Kazan and the Moscow Medical Institute. He
received both an M.D. and a doctorate in education. Initially he worked with the educational psychologist Lev
Vygotsky at Moscow University. Luria researched the
role speech plays in how children develop their conceptual thought processes. Upon Vigotsky’s death in 1934,
Luria continued this research. In particular, he was interested in finding out how different functions, such as
speech, were controlled in normal and abnormal brains.

Leick, Nini and Marianne Davidsen-Nielsen. Healing pain: attachment, loss and grief therapy. London and NY: Tavistock Routledge, 1991.
Deits, Bob. Life after loss: a personal guide to dealing with
death, divorce, job change and relocation. Tucson, Arizona: Fisher Books, 1992.
Bowlby, John. Attachment and loss. New York: Basic Books, 1980.
Kubler-Ross, Elizabeth. On death and dying. New York:
Macmillan, (1969)1971.

Memory fascinated Luria—both what people did
and did not remember. One of his earliest subjects, a
newspaper reporter identified as S., was sent to Luria because of what seemed to be a nearly perfect memory.
Over the course of many years Luria conducted experiments on S., trying to pinpoint precisely what it was that
accounted for this exceptional memory. He concluded
that S’s brain was able to process information in a

Lara Lynn Lane

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

399

Aleksandr Romanovich Luria

Grieving is an important process in which people
learn to accept their losses. Althought some people grief
rather easily and naturally, not allowing oneself to grieve
can lead to unresolved grief. There are many forms of
unresolved grief, like not grieving at all, blocked grief,
delayed or conflicted grief, unanticipated grief that
comes up later, and/or chronic grief. The symptoms of
unresolved grief are numerous, including but not limited
to: over-activity, having the symptoms of the deceased,
psychosomatic (imagined and possibly created) illnesses, drastic changes in social network, hostility towards
people connected with the death, self-sabotage, severe
depression, suicidal tendencies, over-identification with
the deceased, and/or phobias about illness or death. Unresolved grief can come about because of guilt, the new
loss awakening an old loss, multiple losses, an inability
to cope, or resistance to the process of mourning. Any
unresolved grief holds up growth in life and can lead to
serious mental or physical problems.

Aleksandr Romanovich Luria

unique way, using perception as well as memory. Luria
wrote about his experiments with S. in The Mind of a
Mnemonist.
During the Second World war Luria’s research and
experimentation were put into action, as he developed
new ways to treat soldiers suffering from head wounds.
Specifically, his research into speech and the brain
helped him to treat soldiers whose injuries had robbed
them of the ability to speak. He developed new programs
for rehabilitation over the next three decades. Another
famous patient of Luria’s was the physicist Lev Landau.
Landau had been severely injured in an automobile
crash, and other doctors pronounced him dead and rescuscitated him four times. Thanks to the work of Luria
and his assistants, Landau was revived and able to restore much of his normal brain function.
Luria also continued his work with children. His research led him to the conclusion that retarded children
could make the most progress in an environment that

400

focused on their specific handicap, and he advocated the
creation of special schools for this function.
Luria was recognized in his own country with the
Order of Lenin, and he received several other awards
from the Soviet Union and other countries. Fluent in English, he made several trips to the United States to lecture.
He was a member of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States, the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences, and the American Academy of Education.
He was married in 1933 to Lana Lipchina; the couple had one daughter. Luria continued his work into the
1970s; he died on August 16, 1977.
George A. Milite
Further Reading
Luria, Aleksandr R. The Mind of a Mnemonist: A Little Book
about a Vast Memory. New York: Basic Books, 1968.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

M
Eleanor Emmons Maccoby
1917American psychologist and educator.

Most widely known for her work in the psychology
of sex differences, Eleanor Maccoby has achieved a distinguished career as an educator as well. She spent eight
years in the 1950s as a lecturer and research associate in
social relations at Harvard University. Later, she joined
the faculty at Stanford University and eventually became
chairman of the psychology department.
Eleanor Emmons was born May 15, 1916, in Tacoma, Washington, to Harry Eugene and Viva May Emmons. She married Nathan Maccoby in 1938, received
her bachelor’s degree from the University of Washington
in 1939, and then traveled to Washington, D.C., where
she spent the years during World War II working for a
government agency. Returning to her studies at the University of Michigan, Maccoby earned her master’s degree in 1949 and her Ph.D. in 1950. She spent the next
eight years at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts, before moving to Stanford University in California, where she served as a professor and chairman of
the psychology department from 1973-76.
Although Eleanor Maccoby’s interests lay primarily
in studying the social factors that influence human development, she also considered the interweaving contributions of other factors, such as biological and cognitive
processes. In fact, for her doctoral dissertation, which
she completed under the guidance of B.F. Skinner, she
conducted experiments in learning and reinforcement.
After finishing her doctoral work, Maccoby joined
Robert Sears, then a professor of social relations at Harvard, in a large-scale study investigating whether certain
parental practices were related to children’s personality
characteristics. This study resulted in an influential
book, Patterns of Child Rearing. Maccoby’s work led
her to believe that identification was an important mod-

erating variable in the development of personality. This
notion was supported in her work in parent-child socialization and also in studies of children’s identification
with film characters.
Maccoby’s interest in children and research never
flagged. Even while deeply involved in this socialization
project, she conducted studies on the effects of television
on children, identifying the kinds of activities that were
displaced when families acquired televisions, and other
studies of the influence of neighborhood cohesion on
delinquency rates in low-income areas. She found that
neighborhoods in low-income, “at risk” areas had lower
rates of juvenile delinquency when they were relatively
tightly knit and, simply put, people looked out for one
another and one another’s children.
After moving to Stanford, Maccoby added studies
of developmental changes in attention to her areas of
study. She and her colleagues demonstrated that as they
grew, children improved first in the ability to attend to a
single message in the presence of distractions, and then
in the ability to divide attention between simultaneously
competing stimuli.
It was also at Stanford that Maccoby began a long association with Carol Nagy Jacklin that would result in the
work for which she is most well known. Jacklin and Maccoby studied differences and similarities in boys and girls,
using a thorough review of available literature as well as
original research. Their 1974 book, The Psychology of Sex
Differences, represented an unparalleled synthesis of research in the area of sex differences in development, and,
given the political climate of the 1970s, stimulated much
discussion. Maccoby and Jacklin were simultaneously
criticized for being too biological, not biological enough,
giving too much credence to socialization pressures, and
not giving enough credence to social forces.
Interestingly, however, Maccoby and Jacklin offered
a third possibility for forces that shape differences between the sexes that reflected Maccoby’s earlier interests
in cognition and identification. They argued that, in ad-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

401

Mania

dition to being influenced by their biology and the social
environment around them, children engaged in “self-socialization.” The authors suggested that in this proactive
process, children themselves draw inferences from the
roles and behaviors in which they see men and women,
boys and girls engaging. Depending on their developmental level, children then use these inferences to guide
their own behavior.
Maccoby’s published works reflect her abiding interest in the socialdevelopment of children and differences between the sexes. Maccoby has received many
honors and awards during her career. They include the
Gores Award for excellence in teaching from Stanford
(1981); a research award from the American Educational
Research Association (1984); an award recognizing her
research from the Society for Research in Child Development (1987); and the Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award from the American Psychological Association (1988). She was elected to the National Academy of
Sciences in 1993.
Doreen Arcus Ph.D.
Further Reading
Maccoby, E. “Eleanor E. Maccoby.” In A History of Psychology in Autobiography. G. Lindzey, ed. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1989.
———. Social Development: Psychological Growth and the
Parent-Child Relationship. New York: Harcourt, Brace
and Jovanovich, 1980.
Maccoby, E., and C.N. Jacklin. Psychology of Sex Differences.
Stanford: Stanford Univesity Press, 1974.
Maccoby, E., and R.H. Mnookin. Dividing the Child: Social
and Legal Dilemmas of Custody. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992.

Mania
A description of the condition opposite depression
in manic-depressive psychosis, or bipolar disorder.
It is characterized by a mood of elation without apparent reason.

Most episodes of mania—elation without reasonable cause or justification—are followed in short order
by depression; together they represent the opposites described as bipolar disorder. Manic episodes are characterized by intense feelings of energy and enthusiasm, uncharacteristic self-confidence, continuous talking, and
little need for sleep. People experiencing a manic period
tend to make grandiose plans and maintain inflated beliefs about their own personal abilities. While manic
402

people appear to be joyful and celebratory, their mood
corresponds little to conditions they are experiencing in
reality. Expressions of hostility and irritability also are
common during manic episodes.
Further Reading
Duke, Patty. Call Me Anna. New York: Bantam, 1987.
Jamison, Kay. Touched with Fire: Manic-Depressive Illness and
the Artistic Temperament. New York: Free Press, 1993

Manic depression
See Bipolar disorder

Marijuana
The common name of a small number of varieties
of Cannabis sativa, or Indian hemp plant, which
contain tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), a psychoactive drug.

Cannabis, in the form of marijuana, hashish (a dried
resinous material that seeps from cannabis leaves and is
more potent than marijuana), or other cannabinoids, is
probably the most often used illegal substance in the
world. In the United States, marijuana use became widespread among young people in the 1960s. By 1979, 68
percent of young adults between the ages of 18 and 25
had experimented with it at least once, and it was reported that as of the same year the total number of people in
the U.S. who had tried the drug was 50 million. In the
late 1980s, it was estimated that about 50 to 60 percent
of people between the ages of 21 and 29 had tried marijuana at least once.
Marijuana and hashish are usually smoked, but may
also be ingested orally, and are sometimes added to food
or beverages. The psychoactive substance of cannabis is
tetrahydrocannabinol, or THC, especially delta-9tetrahydrocannabinol. Delta-9-THC can be synthesized,
is known to affect the central nervous system, and has
been legally used to treat side-effects of chemotherapy
and weight loss in persons affected with AIDS. Other
legal therapeutic uses of marijuana include the treatment
of glaucoma and epilepsy.
The effects of cannabis use vary from individual to
individual, depending on the physical and psychological
condition of the user, the amount of THC consumed, and

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Marijuana

A chemical present in marijuana has been shown to destroy brain cells in rats. (Photo by Tom McHugh. National Audubon
Society Collection/Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

many other factors. Technically, marijuana is classified as
a hallucinogen, but its effects are usually much milder
than those of other drugs in this category, such as LSD,
mescaline, and psilocybin. When it is inhaled through a
marijuana cigarette, THC reaches its highest concentration in the blood within a half hour, and is absorbed by
the brain and other organs, and can affect consciousness
for several hours. THC can remain stored in body fat for
several weeks. Marijuana users commonly experience
feelings of euphoria, self-confidence, reduced inhibition,
relaxation, and a floating sensation. Feelings of giddiness
and mild feelings of paranoia are also common. Physiological effects include increases in pulse and heart rates,
reddened eyes, dryness of the mouth, and an increased
appetite. The initial euphoric feelings after ingesting marijuana are generally followed by sleepiness. Although
marijuana has been known to produce psychological dependence, there is little tendency to become physically
dependent on it, and withdrawal from the drug does not
pose medical problems. Recently, receptors for THC have
been discovered in the brain, together with a naturally-occurring substance—anandamide—that binds the chemical
to its receptors and may be a neurotransmitter.

Documented negative effects of marijuana use include impairment in perception, sensory motor coordination, short-term memory, and panic attacks, and is
also linked to impairment of the immune system, lowered testosterone levels in males, and chromosome
damage. If taken by pregnant women, marijuana affects
the developing fetus. Long-term marijuana smokers
display similar respiratory dysfunctions as tobacco
smokers In research on rats, THC has been found to destroy cells in the hippocampus, a part of the brain that
is important in the formation of new memories. Psychologically, chronic use of marijuana has been associated with a loss of ambition known as amotivational
syndrome. Authorities differ with respect to the physical and psychological risks of short-term and long-term
use/abuse of cannabis. Current penalties for the illegal
possession of marijuana, hashish, or other form of
cannabis can be extremely severe.
See also Drugs/Drug abuse
Further Reading
Grinspoon, Lester. Marijuana Reconsidered. Oakland, CA:
Quick American Archives, 1994.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

403

Marriage counseling

Marriage counseling
A clinical specialty of family and marital therapy.

There are many different approaches to marriage
counseling, which may be used alone or combined with
other methods by the therapist. Among the oldest is the
psychodynamic approach, which attributes problems
within a marriage to the unresolved conflicts and needs of
each spouse. Each client’s personal history and underlying motivations are central to this mode of therapy. Therapists using this approach apply the principles of psychoanalysis in their treatment; they may either treat both
marriage partners individually, or treat one spouse in collaboration with another therapist who treats the other.
Marriage counseling that follows a systems approach stresses the interaction between partners as the
origin of marital difficulties, rather than their actions or
personality. Behavior and communication patterns are
analyzed as well as the interlocking roles portrayed by
the couple or members of the family. Family members
may be conditioned to consistently play “the strong one”
or “the weak one,” or such other roles as “scapegoat,”
“caretaker,” or “clown.” Although initially it may seem
that only one member of a family system is troubled, on
closer inspection his or her difficulties are often found to
be symptomatic of an unhealthy pattern in which all the
members play an active part. Systems theory is actually
an umbrella term for a range of therapies, and systemsoriented counseling may take a variety of forms, including both short- and long-term therapy.
A popular individual treatment approach also used
in marriage counseling is Rogerian or client-centered
therapy, also referred to as humanistic therapy. Here,
the emphasis is on communication and the open sharing
of feelings. Through specially formulated exercises, couples work on improving their speaking and listening
skills and enhancing their capacity for emotional honesty. Another widely employed mode of marriage counseling is based on a behavioral approach, in which marital problems are treated as dysfunctional behaviors that
can be observed and modified. Couples are made aware
of destructive behavior patterns, often by systematically
recording their behavior until certain patterns emerge.
The therapist then coaches them in various modifying
strategies with the goal of achieving positive, mutually
reinforcing interactions. Behavior-oriented therapy also
focuses on improving a couple’s problem-solving and
conflict-resolution skills.
Marriage counselors may conduct therapy sessions
with both spouses, treating one as the primary client and
the other one only occasionally, while another therapist
404

treats the other spouse. An increasing number of therapists counsel couples in pairs, with married therapists
sometimes working together as a team. Theoretically, the
relationship between the co-therapists is supposed to
serve as a model for their clients. Marriage counseling in
groups, which is becoming increasingly common, offers
clients some of the same advantages that group therapy
offers individuals. Sex counseling, which had previously
been part of marital therapy, emerged as an independent
field following the pioneering work of William Masters
and Virginia Johnson in the 1950s and 1960s. Couples
seeking treatment for sexual dysfunction have the option of working with a sex therapist.
Marriage counseling is usually practiced by licensed
individuals with specialized training in psychology, psychiatry, and counseling, or by persons without such
training, including members of the clergy. The first marriage counseling centers were established in the 1930s,
and the American Association of Marriage and Family
Therapy (formally the American Association of Marriage
Counselors) was founded in 1942.
Further Reading
Brammer, Lawrence M. Therapeutic Psychology: Fundamentals of Counseling and Psychotherapy. 5th ed. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1989.
Ronch, Judah L, William van Ornum, and Nicholas C. Stilwell,
eds. The Counseling Sourcebook: A Practical Reference
on Contemporary Issues. New York: Crossroad, 1994.

Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs
See Maslow, Abraham

Abraham Maslow
1908-1970
American psychologist.

A central figure in humanistic psychology and in
the human potential movement, Abraham Maslow is
known especially for his theory of motivation. He was
born and raised in Brooklyn, New York, and received his
Ph.D. in psychology from the University of Wisconsin in
1934. Maslow then began medical studies, which he discontinued within a year, after which he was offered a
postdoctoral research fellowship to work with Edward
Thorndike at Columbia University. After moving to
New York, Maslow met many prominent European psy-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Abraham Maslow

Selfactualization
needs
(Self-fulfillment
and realization
of one's potential)

Esteem needs
(Fulfillment of
approval by others;
recognition)

Belongingness
and love needs
(Fulfillment of acceptance by others;
to belong)

Safety needs
(Fulfillment of security, safety)

Biological needs
(Fulfillment of basic needs: food, water, etc.)
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs.
Abraham Maslow (UPI/Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with
permission.)

chologists and social scientists who had fled Nazi Germany. Several of these emigrés became his mentors, including psychoanalysts Alfred Adler, Erich Fromm,
and Karen Horney and Gestalt psychologists Max
Wertheimer (1880-1943) and Kurt Koffka (18861941). In 1937 Maslow began teaching at the newly
opened Brooklyn College. At the urging of anthropologist Ruth Benedict (1887-1948), whom Maslow had met
at Columbia, he spent the summer of 1938 doing field
work on a Blackfoot Indian reservation in Alberta, Canada, with financial support from the Social Science Research Council. In 1951 Maslow became the head of the
psychology department at Brandeis University, where he
remained until a year before his death in 1970.
During the 1940s, Maslow began to work out his
theory of human motivation, which was eventually published in Motivation and Human Personality in 1954.
Rejecting the determinism of both the psychoanalytic
and behaviorist approaches, Maslow took an optimistic
approach to human behavior that emphasized developing
one’s full potential. Instead of basing his psychological
model on people with mental and emotional problems,
he used as his point of reference a collection of exceptionally dynamic and successful historical and contemporary figures whom he considered “self-actualizers,” including Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826), Abraham Lin-

coln (1809-1865), Jane Addams (1860-1935), Albert
Einstein (1879-1955), and Eleanor Roosevelt (18841962). In addition to drawing up a list of the common
traits of self-actualized individuals, Maslow placed selfactualization at the peak of his hierarchy of human motivations, the concept for which he is best known today.
This hierarchy is generally portrayed as a pyramid
with five levels, ranging from the most basic needs at the
bottom to the most complex and sophisticated at the top.
From bottom to top, the levels are biological needs (food,
water, shelter); safety; belongingness and love; the need
to be esteemed by others; and self-actualization, the need
to realize one’s full potential. According to Maslow, the
needs at each level must be met before one can move on
to the next level. With so many other issues to concern
them, the vast majority of people never grapple with selfactualization; Maslow considered fewer than one percent
of the population to be self-actualized individuals. However, he believed that all human beings still possessed an
innate (if unmet) need to reach this state.
During the 1950s and 1960s, Maslow became associated with the movement known as humanistic psychology, which he also referred to as the Third Force because
it offered an alternative to the prevailing schools of psychoanalysis and behaviorism in both theory and thera-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

405

Masochism

peutic practice. Like Maslow, colleagues such as Carl
Rogers and Rollo May rejected the idea that human behavior was determined by childhood events or conditioning and stressed instead the individual’s power to
grow and change in the present. They believed that the
goal of psychotherapy was to remove the obstacles that
prevented their clients from self-actualizing.
As humanistic psychology gave birth to the human
potential movement of the 1960s, Maslow became one
of its central figures, lecturing at the Esalen Institute at
Big Sur, California, which offered workshops by psychologists, social scientists, philosophers, and other intellectual figures. During these years, he also popularized the concept of the peak experience, an unusual moment of extreme joy, serenity, beauty, or wonder that he
believed was closely related to self-actualization. In
1967 and 1968, Maslow served as president of the American Psychological Association. In 1969, he moved to
Menlo Park, California, where he died of a heart attack a
year later. In his lifetime Maslow published over 100 articles in magazines and professional journals. His other
books include Toward a Psychology of Being (1962), Religions, Values, and Peak Experiences (1964), Eupsychian Management (1965), The Psychology of Science
(1966), and a posthumous collection of papers entitled
The Farther Reaches of Human Nature (1971).
Further Reading

sexuality was reinforced when he learned of the research
done by Alfred Kinsey (1894-1956) at the University of Indiana, where he had interviewed men and women about
their sexual experiences. Masters completed his internship
and residency at St. Louis Hospital and Barnes Hospital,
choosing obstetrics and gynecology as a speciality. He also
did an internship in pathology at the Washington University
School of Medicine.
In 1947, Masters was appointed to the faculty of
Washington University, where he conducted research in
areas including hormone-replacement therapy for postmenopausal women. In 1954, he began researching the
physiology of sex by collecting data about sexual stimulation in a laboratory situation. His work, which took
place at Washington University, was supported by a
grant from the United States Institute of Health. By
1956, Virginia Johnson, a sociology student, was assisting Masters interview and screen research volunteers.
Over an 11-year period, Masters studied 382 women and
312 men ranging in age from 18 to 89, recording their
sexual responses using electrocardiographs and electroencephalographs.

Hoffman, Edward. The Right to be Human: A Biography of
Abraham Maslow. Los Angeles: Tarcher, 1988.

Masochism
See Paraphilias

William Masters
1915American physician and researcher who, in collaboration with Virginia Johnson, pioneered in the
physiological study of human sexual function.

William Masters was born in Cleveland, Ohio, grew up
in Kansas City, and did his undergraduate work at Hamilton
College. He received his M.D. degree in 1943 from the University of Rochester School of Medicine, where he assisted
in the laboratory research of George Washington Corner,
who was studying and comparing the reproductive systems
of animals and humans. Masters’s interest in the study of
406

William Masters, right, with coworker Virginia Johnson.
(UPI/Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with permission.)

Masters established the Reproductive Biology Research Foundation in 1964. Two years later, Masters and
Johnson published the results of their long-term laboratory investigation of the physiology of human sexual activity in Human Sexual Response. This book is generally
considered to be the first major scientific analysis of the
subject, and was produced to provide physicians and
psychologists with factual information useful in the
treatment of sexual dysfunction. Despite the book’s promotion solely as a serious research work, it won wide
popular acclaim, and its authors were soon in demand as
speakers and lecturers.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Masters retired from private practice in gynecology
in 1981, although he and his wife continued to operate
the Masters and Johnson Institute, which moved to a new
location that year. In 1988, they co-authored the book
Crisis: Heterosexual Behavior in the Age of AIDS with
Robert Kolodny, attracting criticism within the medical
community—including that of then Attorney General C.
Everett Koop—for their prediction that the AIDS epidemic would spread to the heterosexual population. Masters
and Johnson were divorced in 1992, ending their work together at the Institute. Their other books include Human
Sexual Inadequacy (1970), The Pleasure Bond (1974),
Human Sexuality (1988), and Heterosexuality (1994).

psychology, with its focus on the individual, as opposed
to the behaviorist psychology and Freudian psychoanalysis that was prevalent in the 1940s and 1950s. May’s
writings were both practical and spiritual and they promoted the power and worth of the individual. As such,
they contributed to the development of the human potential movement. May maintained that widespread
alienation and anxiety were a result of breakdown and
upheaval in culture and society, rather than the result of
individual psychological problems. Among May’s many
honors were the annual award of the New York Society
of Clinical Psychologists in 1954 and a 1971 gold medal
from the American Psychological Association.
Born in Ada, Ohio, in 1909, as Reece May, he was
the second of six children of Earl Tittle May and Matie
Boughton. His father, a field secretary for the Young
Men’s Christian Association, moved the family to Michigan when May was still a child. Although initially he was
a reticent student, at Michigan State College of Agriculture and Applied Science (now Michigan State University) in East Lansing, he co-founded a magazine that was
critical of the state legislature. The flap that followed
caused him to transfer to Oberlin College, a small liberal
arts school in Ohio. An English major, with a minor in
Greek literature and history, May graduated in 1930 and
spent the next three years teaching English in Salonika,
Greece. During that period, he attended seminars in Vienna, Austria, with the famous psychoanalyst Alfred Adler.

Studies for the ministry
Further Reading
Robinson, Paul. The Modernization of Sex. New York: Harper
& Row, 1976.

Masturbation
See Autoeroticism

Rollo May
1909-1994
American existential psychoanalyst who popularized a humanistic, spiritually based psychology.

Rollo May was one of the most influential American
psychologists of the twentieth century. He helped to introduce European existential psychoanalysis to an
American audience. He was a founder of humanistic

In 1933 May entered the Union Theological Seminary in New York City. His studies were interrupted for
two years when his parents divorced. He returned to
Michigan to help with his younger siblings and worked as
a student adviser at Michigan State. In 1938, he earned his
divinity degree from Union, studying with the existentialist theologian Paul Tillich. May married Florence De
Frees in 1938, and eventually they had a son and twin
daughters. After two years as a minister at a Congregational Church in New Jersey, May decided that his true interests lay in psychology. In 1939, he published The Art of
Counseling: How to Gain and Give Mental Health, and
two years later his second book, Springs of Creative Living: A Study of Human Nature and God, was published.
In 1942, May was stricken with tuberculosis. After
eighteen months in a sanitarium in upstate New York, he
decided that his attitudes and his personal will were
more important to his recovery than the treatments. He
entered the graduate psychology program at Columbia
University in New York City, receiving his Ph.D. in clinical psychology in 1949 with the highest honors. In the
decades that followed, May’s dissertation, The Meaning

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

407

Rollo May

Since 1959, Masters and Johnson had been applying
their studies to counseling sexually dysfunctional couples, working together as a team so that each member of
a couple would have a therapist of the same sex to relate
to. Having found sexual functioning susceptible to conditioning, much like other human and animal behaviors,
they used learning strategies based on the theories of
Ivan Pavlov, B. F. Skinner, Wolpe, and others. Following the principles of operant conditioning and desensitization, they helped their patients “unlearn” blocks involving arousal and/or orgasm. Masters and Johnson
were married in 1971 and became co-directors of the
Masters and Johnson Institute in 1973. In their 1979
work, Homosexuality in Perspective, Masters and Johnson detailed the results of studies based on the responses
of homosexuals and lesbians, whose sexual preferences
they claimed to be able to change.

William McDougall

of Anxiety, published in 1950, and revised in 1977, had a
major influence on the development of humanistic psychology. He argued that culture was in an “age of anxiety” and, furthermore, that channeling his own high anxiety was a major factor in overcoming his tuberculosis.
By 1948, May had become an assistant professor of
psychiatry at the William Alanson White Institute of Psychiatry, Psychoanalysis, and Psychology in New York
City. In 1958, he became the training and supervisory
psychoanalyst there. He remained at the Institute until
his retirement in 1974. He also served as an adjunct professor of clinical psychology at New York University and
as a lecturer in psychotherapy at the New School for
Social Research from 1955 until 1976. May held visiting
professorships at Harvard, Princeton, and Yale Universities, and at Brooklyn College. In 1973, he became a Regents’ Professor at the University of California at Santa
Cruz. May maintained a private psychoanalysis practice
in New York City and, following his retirement from
academia, in Tiburon, California.

Writings influence the activists of the 1960s
May was a prolific and influential author whose
books often were aimed at the general reader. His major
works included Existential Psychology in 1961, Psychology and the Human Dilemma in 1967, The Courage to
Create in 1975, Freedom and Destiny in 1981, and The
Cry for Myth in 1991. Love and Will, published in 1969,
won the Ralph Waldo Emerson Award of Phi Beta Kappa
and became a guidebook for political and social activists.
In 1972, Power and Innocence: A Search for the Sources
of Violence won the Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Award
from the New York Society of Clinical Psychologists. In
May’s later writings, the “age of anxiety” became the
“age of despair.” To reach a larger audience, May made a
number of sound recordings.
May and his first wife were divorced in 1969 and in
1971 he married Ingrid Schöll. That marriage ended in
1978. In 1989, May married Georgia Lee Miller Johnson. May was a member of numerous professional organizations and his honorary degrees included L.H.D.s
from Kingfisher College of the University of Oklahoma,
St. Regis College, St. Vincent College, Michigan State
University, Rockford College, Ohio Northern University,
and Oberlin College. He died of congestive heart failure
at his home in Tiburon, California, in 1994.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Crompton, Samuel Willard. “May, Rollo.” In American National Biography, edited by John A. Garraty and Mark C.
Carnes. Vol. 14. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
408

May, Rollo. Man’s Search for Himself. New York: Norton, 1953.
Reeves, Clement. The Psychology of Rollo May; with Reflections and Commentary by Rollo May. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1977.
Serlin, Ilene A. “Rollo May.” Tikkun 10 (January-February,
1995): 65.

William McDougall
1871-1938
British experimental psychologist who developed a
theory of human instincts and studied psychic phenomena.

William McDougall was an experimental psychologist and theorist of wide-ranging interests. Above all, he
believed in a holistic psychology that utilized every
available tool for understanding the human psyche. He
was the first to formulate a theory of human instinctual
behavior, and he influenced the development of the new
field of social psychology.
Born in 1871, in Lancashire, England, the second
son of Rebekah Smalley and Isaac Shimwell McDougall,
a wealthy Scottish industrialist, McDougall was educated at a local private school and then at the Realgynmnasium in Weimar, Germany. Although his father wanted
him to study law or work in the family businesses, his
mother supported his desire to become a scientist.

Studies medicine and psychology
At 15, McDougall entered the university in Manchester, earning degrees in biology and geology. A scholarship took him to St. John’s College of Cambridge University, where he received his B.A. in natural science in
1894. It was at Cambridge that McDougall became interested in the melding of biology and the social sciences.
Another scholarship enabled him to study medicine at
St. Thomas Hospital in London. He earned his medical
degree in 1898, with specialties in physiology and neurology. He was awarded the Grainger Testimonial Prize
for his research on muscle contractions. However, the
work of William James inspired McDougall to pursue
psychology.
In 1898, McDougall became a fellow of St. John’s
College, as a result of his proposal for a neurophysiological study of the mind-body problem. In 1899 he accompanied the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to the
Torres Straits near New Guinea as the attending physician. His studies from the expedition, The Pagan Tribes
of Borneo, with Charles Hose, were published in 1912.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Pursues paranormal psychology
In 1911, McDougall published Body and Mind in
which he argued for the scientific existence of the human
soul and discussed psychic research. His interest in paranormal psychology, including mental telepathy and clairvoyance, was increasing. In 1912, he was named a fellow of Corpus Christi College at Oxford. That same
year, he became a fellow of the Royal Society of London. He served as vice-president of the Psychiatric Section of the Royal Society of Medicine from 1914 until
1918, when he became president. In 1920 he became
president of the British Society for Psychical Research.

William McDougall (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

Introduces experimental psychology in
England
In 1900, McDougall married Annie Aurelia Hickmore and the couple eventually had three sons and two
daughters. They spent their first year together in Göttingen, Germany, where McDougall studied experimental
psychology with G. E. Müller. McDougall then became
a lecturer at University College, London. His first publications, “On the Seat of the Psycho-Physical Processes”
and “New Observations in Support of Thomas Young’s
Theory of Light- and Color-Vision, I-III” appeared in
1901. These were followed by papers on the physiology
of attention and on the senses. In London, he also began
working with Francis Galton and Charles Spearman
on mental testing and eugenics, the theory that genetics
could be used to improve the human race. McDougall
co-founded the British Psychological Society in 1901.
He also co-founded the British Journal of Psychology.
In 1904, McDougall moved to Oxford University as
the Wilde Reader in Mental Philosophy, a post he held
until 1920. He was the first experimental psychologist at
Oxford. The first of McDougall’s textbooks, Physiological
Psychology, was published in 1905. One of his most successful texts, An Introduction to Social Psychology, first

With the onset of World War I, McDougall joined
the French army as an ambulance driver. Between 1915
and 1919, he served as a major in the British Army Medical Corps where he worked with victims of shell shock
(post-traumatic stress disorder). This work led, in
1926, to his Outline of Abnormal Psychology.

Moves to Harvard University
McDougall moved to the United States in 1920, accepting the William James Chair of Psychology at Harvard University. Outline of Psychology, published in
1923, is considered to be one of his most important
books. However McDougall was not well-received at
Harvard, due to the racist nature of his views on eugenics
and his opposition to behaviorism. His debate with John
B. Watson was published in 1928 as The Battle of Behaviorism. His interest in psychic phenomena also was controversial. McDougall became president of the American
Society for Psychical Research and investigated the
medium known as “Margery” (Mina S. Crandon), whom
he eventually decided was a fraud. In 1925, he co-founded the Boston Society for Psychical Research.
In 1927, McDougall became chairman of the Psychology Department at Duke University in North Carolina. There he supported the establishment of the Parapsychology Laboratory and in the last year of his life he coedited the Journal of Parapsychology. McDougall also
continued experiments in which he attempted to prove
that white rats could inherit acquired traits. He wrote cri-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

409

William McDougall

published in 1908, was also his most influential. In it, McDougall introduced his controversial theory of instincts,
arguing that all human behavior, including social relationships, could be explained by the many instincts which
were related to primary emotions. For example, fleeing
was an instinct related to the emotion of fear. In later
writings, instincts became “propensities” and he argued
that the purpose of an instinct was to move one toward a
goal. He called this “purposive” or “hormic” psychology.

Margaret Mead

tiques of dynamic, Gestalt, and Freudian psychologies,
exemplified by his 1935 book, Psychoanalysis and Social
Psychology. He also wrote books on a variety of social issues, including world peace. In all, McDougall wrote
more than 20 books and 167 articles. He held an honorary
doctorate from the University of Manchester and was
named an honorary fellow of St. John’s College, Cambridge, in 1938. McDougall died of cancer in Durham,
North Carolina, in 1938. In 1957, the Parapsychology
Laboratory at Duke established the McDougall Award for
Distinguished Work in Parapsychology.
See also Parapsychology
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Nordby, Vernon J. and Calvin S. Hall. A Guide to Psychologists and Their Concepts. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman
and Company, 1974.
McCurdy, Harold G. “McDougall, William.” In Thinkers of the
Twentieth Century, edited by Elizabeth Devine, Michael
Held, James Vinson, and George Walsh., 373-75. Detroit:
Gale Research Company, 1983.
McDougall, William. The Riddle of Life: A Survey of Theories.
London: Methuen, 1938.
Van Over, Raymond and Laura Oteri, eds. William McDougall:
Explorer of the Mind: Studies in Psychical Research. New
York: Garrett, 1967.

Margaret Mead
1901-1978
American anthropologist whose work emphasized
the relationship between culture and personality
formation.

Margaret Mead was born in Philadelphia to a family
of educators. In her youth, her main influences were her
mother and maternal grandmother, both of whom had
raised families and also pursued careers. Mead’s formal
education before entering college was sporadic, and she
was mainly educated at home by her grandmother. An
unhappy year at DePauw University turned Mead against
coeducation, and she subsequently transferred to
Barnard College. She first concentrated in English and
psychology but became interested in anthropology under
the influence of Columbia University anthropologists
Franz Boas (1858-1942) and Ruth Benedict (18871948). Boas was urgently organizing ethnographic investigations of primitive cultures throughout the world before eventual contact with modern society, and he convinced Mead that she could make a contribution to this
410

burgeoning field. After receiving her M.A. in psychology
in 1924, she conducted her first field work in American
Samoa, where she observed adolescent girls to determine
if the turmoil associated with adolescence in the West is
universal. Living with her research subjects in a Samoan
village, Mead was the first American to use the participant-observer method developed by British anthropologist Bronislaw Malinowski (1884-1942). Upon her return to the United States, she received her Ph.D. in anthropology in 1929 and published Coming of Age in
Samoa (1928), in which she presented a portrait of
Samoan culture as free from the sturm und drang of the
teen years in Western societies because preparation for
adulthood is a continuous process that begins early in
life rather than a series of stages, which create a more
stressful transition process.
Mead did extensive field work throughout the 1920s
and 1930s. After her initial trip, she was always joined
by a collaborator. These included her second husband,
New Zealand psychologist Reo Fortune, and her third
husband, the British anthropologist Gregory Bateson,
whom she married in 1935. Mead and Bateson conducted two years of intensive field work together in Bali,
pursuing their different research interests. They pioneered the use of film as a resource for anthropological
research, shooting some 22,000 feet of film as well as
thousands of still photographs. Besides the Balinese,
groups studied by Mead included the Manus people of
the Admiralty Islands, and the Arapesh, Mundugumor,
Tchambuli, and Iatmul of New Guinea. A tireless investigator, she made many repeat visits to her research sites;
over a 47-year period, she observed the Manus people
seven times. Having studied seven different Pacific cultures as well as the Omaha tribe of North America, Mead
became convinced of the importance of culture as a determinant of personality, following in the footsteps of
Alfred Adler in the field of psychology and Ruth Benedict in anthropology. Mead detailed her theories of character formation and culture in Sex and Temperament in
Three Primitive Societies (1935) and expanded further
on the role of culture in gender formation in her 1949
work, Male and Female: A Study of the Sexes in a
Changing World. (Although Mead’s stature as an anthropologist is unquestioned, there has been some speculation that her subjects may have systematically lied to her
during her investigations.)In contrast to Sigmund Freud’s
dictum, “anatomy is destiny,” Mead found gender roles
to be culturally determined rather than innate, noting that
behavior regarded as masculine in one culture could be
considered feminine in another.
Mead’s professional skills were enlisted by the United States government during World War II to analyze the
cultural characteristics of its wartime adversaries, the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Mean
Margaret Mead (sitting) with Manus children during 1928 visit to Admiralty Islands. (UPI/Bettmann. Reproduced with permisison.)

Germans and Japanese, and facilitate relations with its
allies, especially the British. From 1926 to 1964, Mead
was associated with the American Museum of Natural
History in New York City as a curator of ethnology,
eventually attaining the status of curator emeritus. She
became an adjunct professor at Columbia in 1954 and
also held a number of visiting professorships elsewhere.
Mead was also the chairperson of the Social Sciences division of Fordham University beginning in 1968. She
served as president of the World Federation of Mental
Health (1956-57), the American Anthropological Association (1960), and the American Association for the Advancement of Science (1975). Beginning in the 1960s,
Mead’s influence expanded to include a wider audience,
as she agreed to write a monthly column for Redbook
magazine, in which she discussed topics she had concentrated on for much of her career—child-rearing practices
and the family. In turn, she used her readers’ letters to
learn more about the concerns of American women.
Mead was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal
of Freedom. Her other books include Growing Up in
New Guinea (1930), Balinese Character (with Gregory
Bateson, 1942), Soviet Attitudes Toward Authority
(1951), Childhood in Contemporary Societies (1955),

Anthropology: A Human Science (1964), Blackberry
Winter (1972), an autobiographical account of her early
life, and Letters from the Field, 1925-1975 (1977).
See also Child development; Conditioning; Sexuality
Further Reading
Bateson, Mary Catherine. With a Daughter’s Eye: A Memoir of
Margaret Mead and Gregory Bateson. New York: William
Morrow, 1984.
Foerstel, Lenora, and Angela Gilliam, eds. Confronting the Margaret Mead Legacy: Scholarship, Empire, and the South
Pacific. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1992.
Holmes, Lowell D. Quest for the Real Samoa: The Mead/Freeman Controversy and Beyond. South Hadley, MA: Bergin
& Garvey, 1987.
Rice, Edward. Margaret Mead: A Portrait. New York: Harper
& Row, 1979.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Mean
The sum of the values of the points in a data set divided by the number of points.
411

Measurement

EXAMPLE
HEIGHTS IN CENTIMETERS OF FIFTEEN
CHIL D RE N ARE :

124, 137, 144, 136, 157, 129, 130, 131, 125, 128,
133, 133, 129
Sum equals 1995; divide by 15 to get the mean of
133.

In statistics, the mean refers to the value that results
when all the scores in a data set are added together and
the total is divided by the number of scores in the data
set. In the example, the mean for a set of fifteen data
points is calculated. The mean balances the scores on either side of it. Also called the arithmetic mean or average, the mean is one of the measures of central tendency;
the others being the median and the mode.
Further Reading
Peavy, J. Virgil. Descriptive Statistics: Measures of Central
Tendency and Dispersion. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Dept. of
Health and Human Services/Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, 1981.

validity. However, a test can be reliable without being
valid. If a person wanted to make a prediction about
an individual’s personality based on an SAT score,
they would not succeed very well because the SAT is
not a valid test for that purpose, even though it would
still be reliable.
Another dimension of measurement involves what is
called the scale of measurement. There are four different
scales of measurement: nominal, ordinal, interval, and
ratio. Nominal scales involve simple categorization but
does not make use of the notion of comparisons like
larger, bigger, and better. Ordinal scales involve ranking
different elements in some dimension. Interval scales are
used to assess by how much two measurements differ,
and ratio scales can determine the difference between
measurements and by how much. One advantage of
more complex scales of measurement is that they can be
applied to more sophisticated research. More complex
scales also lend themselves to more useful statistical
tests that give researchers more confidence in the results
of their work.

Median
The middle value in a group of measurements.

Measurement
The assessment of a trait or feature against a standard scale.

Psychologists rely heavily on measurements for
very different purposes, ranging from clinical diagnoses
based on test scores to the effects of an independent
variable on a dependent variable in an experiment.
Several different issues arise when considering measurement. One consideration is whether the measurement shows reliability and validity. Reliability refers to
consistency: if the results of a test or measurement are
reliable, a person should receive a similar score if tested
on different occasions. Validity refers to whether the
measurement will be useful for the purposes for which it
is intended.
The Scholastic Assessment Test (SAT) is reasonably reliable, for example, because many students obtain nearly the same score if they take the test more
than once. If the test score is valid, it should be useful
for predicting how well a student will perform in college. Research suggests that the SAT is a sufficient but
not perfect predictor of how well students will perform in their first year in college; thus, it shows some
412

In statistics, the median represents the middle value
in a group of measurements. It is a commonly used indicator of what measurement is typical or normal for a
group. The median is joined by the mean and the mode
to create a grouping called measures of central tendency.
Although the mean is used more frequently than the median, the median is still an important measure of central
tendency because it is not affected by the presence or a
score that is extremely high or extremely low relative to
the other numbers in the group.
See also Mode
Further Reading
Peavy, J. Virgil. Descriptive Statistics: Measures of Central
Tendency and Dispersion. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Dept. of
Health and Human Services/Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, 1981.

EXAMPLE
125-128-129-129-129-130-130-131-133
The median is 129.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Area of psychology that researches the complex
ways in which media influence attitudes, behavior,
and feelings.

According to reports the average American household has the television on for about seven hours a day. It
is also reported that young people are increasingly turning to the Internet as a form of escape and informationgathering. The movie industry spends billions of dollars
on new films every year. Advertising currently has more
outlets, like television, billborads, magazines, radio, the
Internet, and even movies, than it has ever had in history.
And while reading is taking a backseat to newer technological forms of media, newspapers are still a primary
source for news about the world. On a planet filled with
information and entertainment, in a time when our social
evolution seems bound to media, it is more important
than ever to study its effects.

What does psychology have to do with
media?
In academic discussions of mass media, psychology
has long provided concepts, techniques, and theories of
its function. All media can be described in simple terms,
like someone saying a movie was funny or sad, or saying
an article was very polished, or describing the Internet as
chaotic. But when the theories of a discipline are added
to an analysis of something, those theories give the subject matter a framework, or a theoretical perspective.
Psychology, for example, brings cognitive theories to
media studies. Such theories look at the interactions between receivers and the media.
What psychologists have discovered about media
and people is varied, and the research has really just
begun. Some psychologists explore the messages we see
and hear and the effects those messages have on people.
For instance, psychology has been studying the way
women are portrayed on television. Women on television
are generally very, very thin. Some psychologists have
done research that suggests that the thin women on television make a stereotype that dictates that women
should be thin, and if real-life women have different
body sizes they do not feel good about themselves.
Sometimes it is what we do not see and hear in the media
that makes or enforces a stereotype. For instance, have
you ever seen a sitcom that centers around an AsianAmerican family? Not seeing Asian-Americans on television keeps such people invisible in the mainstream of
society. Since the media has become a source of shared
cultural experience that people use to understand the

Processing information
There are different theories on how we understand
what we see and hear. The culturalist approach suggests
that the meaning or interpretation of media is subjective
or individualized. Since perception involves all the
senses and also giving meaning to all information a person takes in, different people can get different meanings
from the same media. The memory has patterns of organization, also called scripts or schemata, which contain strings of associations that are activated by new experiences. New fragments of information are added to
the existing scripts whenever we experience something
new. For instance, when you go to see a movie about
slavery, your memory brings up the script you have
about that topic. All relevant information is added to
what you are seeing in the movie. You may even think
you see things in the movie that are not there, but exist
in your perception because your script is running while
you experience the film.
Perception is also affected by our belief systems, attitudes, and needs. For instance, if you are someone
who is a passivist, that is, a person who does not condone violence at any time, you may watch a movie
about war and take away the message that the movie
was showing what a tragedy violence can be. If someone who is patriotic or fascinated by weaponry watches
the same movie, they may think the movie was glorifying war and showing off some of the best guns ever
made. In this way, it is said that there exists selective
perception, or, “the principle of least effort.” It is easier
to perceive messages that go along with what you expect or believe. Every receiver of information has their
own frame of reference, or place they are coming from
when they receive new media.
Psychologists also study how media acts as a social
tool. People joining book clubs, or a bunch of kids going
to the movies together and then talking about what they
saw, friends asking each other if they’d seen the latest
episode of the hottest new show on T.V., or families
watching television together are instances of meanings
being created socially. Groups of people discussing
media might be called “interpretive communities,” of
“reference groups.” You may use different scripts, or
frames of reference, depending on the social group you
are with because our interpretive communites also influence our perception.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Television and aggression
Lara Lynn Lane
413

Media psychology

Media psychology

world around them, it is important to explore what we
are getting from the media.

Medical psychology

Further Reading
Perspectives on Psychology and the Media Washington, D.C.:
APA, 1997.
Psychology and the Media: A Second Look Washington, D.C.:
APA, 1999.
A Cognitive Psychology of Mass Communication Harris,
Richard Jackson, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers, 1994.
Becker, Samuel L. “Constructing the World in Your Head:
How Mass Media Influences the Way People Process Information,” ETC.: A Review of General Semantics, vol.
44, no. 4, (Winter 1987): 373-382.
Buck, Ross. “Nonverbal Communication: Spontaneous and
Symbolic Aspects,” American Behavioral Scientist, vol.
31, no. 3, (Jan/Feb 1988).
Comstock, George and Stuart Fischoff. “The Field and the Discipline.” American Behavioral Scientist, vol.35, no.2,
(Nov/Dec 1991).
McIlwrath, Robert, et. al. “Television Addiction: Theories and
Data Behind the Ubiquitous Metaphor.” American Behavioral Scientist, vol.35, no.2, (Nov/Dec 1991): 104-121.
Reeces, Byron and Daniel R. Anderson. “Media Studies and
Psychology.” Communication Research, vol.16, no.5,
(October 1991): 597-600.
Shapiro, Michael A. and Annie Lang. “Making Television Reality: Unconscious Processes in the Construction of Social Reality.” Communication Research, vol.18, no.5, (October 1991): 685-705.

Medical psychology
See Health psychology

Paul J. Meehl
1920American clinical psychologist and pioneer in the
field of learning theory.

Minnesota professor influenced the world
Paul Everett Meehl, born on January 3, 1920, is a
renowned expert in various aspects of clinical psychology. He earned his A.B. from the University of Minnesota in 1941, where he remained throughout his entire
professional career. In 1945 he was awarded his doctorate from the same institution. His career as a faculty
member at Minnesota has included his position as chair
of the Department of Psychology from 1951 through
1958. In 2000 Meehl remains actively engaged in research and is the Regents’ (Emeritus) Professor. His
414

scholarship led also to a post as a professor in the medical school’s Department of Psychiatry, in the Minnesota Center for the Philosophy of Science, and on the faculty of the Department of Philosophy. Among his many
roles is his seat on the Advisory Board of Philosophy,
Psychiatry, & Psychology, published by The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Meehl’s pursuits since his early career have
reached a broad spectrum of interests and concerns. He
has focused on the field of clinical psychology, in particular clinical assessment, and in personality, learning, psychometrics, and the philosophy of science.
Meehl’s exploration into the learning process led to his
influence in the field of assessment. Traditionally,
using subjective clinical judgment was used to perform
psychological assessments. Meehl’s work changed this
approach. He developed ways to make assessments on
an actuarial basis in line with quantitative standards.
This approach was instrumental in the eventual computerized evaluation of psychological tests and revolutionized testing forever.

Respected by colleagues
Meehl’s work in testing was as significant among
his own colleagues as it was with the general population.
For the American Psychological Association (APA), he
served as a member of the Committee on Test Standards
and as chair for the Special Committee on Certification
and Licensure of Psychologists. His professional contributions have represented a continually evolving passion
for the scientific treatment of psychological study.
Perhaps Meehl’s most significant contribution to his
field was the fact that he helped prepare many of the most
prominent practicing psychologists in the United States.
He has been a leader in psychotherapy, behavior genetics, the philosophy of science, and forensic psychology,
authoring over 160 publications. One of his first major
studies was published in Modern Learning Theory in
1954. In 1958 Meehl published What, Then, Is Man? Active as a Lutheran layman, he co-authored this monograph exploring the relationship between behavioral science and Christian faith. Three of his works published in
the 1990s reflected his current area of research. As Meehl
himself noted, that work covers three areas; first, the development of testing of taxometric (assigning objects to
appropriate classes) statistical procedures for the classification and genetic analysis of mental disorders and personality types, second, cliometric (the use of mathematical and statistical methods, often using computers, in
order to analyze historical data) metatheory, and third,
philosophical and mathematical contributions to the significance test controversy. His later publications include

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Meehl’s impact throughout psychology, philosophy,
and medicine was significant enough to earn him numerous awards from his professional associations throughout his career. One of his earliest awards was that for
Distinguished Scientific Contributions from the APA in
1958. Meehl was awarded the “Centennial Award” on
August 9, 1996, from Division 12 of the APA in honor of
100 years of clinical psychology. This award honored the
pioneering work he had done when the study of psychology was only beginning to gain scientific recognition.
He has served as a member and Diplomate on the American Board of Professional Psychology (Clinical).
Meehl’s major contributions to the field of psychology were his systematic and mathematical methods of
research. He pioneered this systematic approach to diagnosis and evaluation. In addition to research, Meehl operated a private practice where he performed psychotherapy using both psychoanalytical and rational approaches.
See also Assessment, psychological
Jane Spear
Further Reading
American Psychological Association. Meehl Publications, Professional Information Available at the American Psychological Association Website at: http://www.apa.org, 2000.
Benner, David G., and Hill, Peter C., ed. Baker Encyclopedia
of Psychology & Counseling Grand Rapids, MI: Baker
Books, 1999.

Melancholic depression is characterized by other
features as well. The quality of the depressed mood is
unique, differing from the sadness that an emotionally
healthy person would feel even in response to a very
painful event, such as the death of a loved one. The depression tends to be worse in the morning and associated with early morning awakening (at least two hours before the normal waking time). There is often a marked
change in the affected person’s physical movements,
which can become either agitated or slowed down.
Many persons suffering from melancholic depression
show significant weight loss, with or without anorexic
behavior. A final feature is the presence of intense and
inappropriate guilt feelings.
A person is officially classified as suffering from depression with melancholic features when the persistent
feelings of unhappiness are accompanied by at least
three of the other symptoms listed above. Individuals
with melancholic depression generally respond to antidepressant medications or electroconvulsive therapy. Depression with melancholic features occurs equally in
both men and women but more often in older persons
and more frequently in hospital inpatients than outpatients. Organic conditions associated with melancholic
depression include hyperadrenocorticism, reduced rapid
eye movement (REM) latency, and dexamethasone nonsuppression.
Further Reading
Ostow, Mortimer. The Psychology of Melancholy. New York:
Harper & Row, 1970.

Memory improvement
Melancholia
Melancholia is both an outdated term for depression itself and, currently, a clinically defined characteristic of major depression listed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders.

The term “melancholia” is derived from the Greek
words melas, meaning black, and chole, meaning bile,
and is a vestige of the ancient belief that a person’s
health and temperament are determined by the relative
proportions of the four cardinal humors, or body fluids,
which are blood, phlegm, choler (yellow bile), and
melancholy (black bile). The central feature of melancholic depression is persistent and unremitting sadness. Persons suffering from this disorder are unable to
enjoy normally pleasurable experiences, even brief
ones, and they exhibit a greatly reduced sensitivity to
pleasurable stimuli.

See Memory; Mnemonic strategies

Memory
The ability to store and later recall previously learned
facts and experiences.

The brain’s capacity to remember remains one of
the least understood areas of science. What is understood
is that memory is a process that occurs constantly and in
varying stages. The memory process occurs in three
stages: encoding, storage, and retrieval. Conditions present during each of these stages affect the quality of the
memory, and breakdowns at any of these points can
cause memory failure.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

415

Memory

Cliometric Metatheory: The actuarial approach to empirical, history-based philosophy of science in 1992.

Memory

there is room in short-term memory for an average of
seven items, plus or minus two (known as magic number seven). In experiments in which subjects are asked
to recall a series of unrelated numbers or words, for example, some are able to recall nine and others only five,
but most will recall seven words. As the list of things to
be remembered increases, new items can displace previous items in the current list. Memory uses a process
called “chunking” to increase the capacity of short-term
memory. While most people still can use only seven
“slots” of memory, facts or information can be grouped
in meaningful ways to form a chunk of memory. These
chunks of related items then act as one item within
short-term memory.

Stages of Memory

Encoding

Storage

Retrieval

The first stage, encoding, is the reception by the
brain of some physical input that is changed into a form
that the memory accepts. When a person is introduced
to someone new, for example, that person’s name becomes a part of memory. Before information can be encoded, it first must be recognized and noted by the recipient. During the second stage, storage, learned facts
or experiences are retained in either short-term or longterm memory. In the third, or retrieval, stage, memory
allows the previously learned facts or experiences to be
recalled. Each of these stages play an important role in
both short-term and long-term memory, although it is
believed they work differently depending on which
memory is used.
As the term implies, short-term memory is used for
items that need recall over short periods of time, sometimes as little as seconds. It is believed that short-term
memories are encoded either visually or acoustically. Visual encoding is primary for recalling faces, places, and
other visual experiences, while acoustic encoding is
most important for verbal material. After looking up a
number in a telephone book, for example, most people
repeat the number to themselves several times before dialing the number. Rather than visualizing the written
form of the numbers, the sound of the words becomes
the means for recall. Experiments have demonstrated the
importance of acoustic coding in the ability to recall lists
of words or letters as well. When subjects were asked to
recall a sequence of letters, those who made errors replaced the correct letter with a similarly sounding letter,
for example “D” instead of “T.”
Adequate operation of short-term memory is crucial
when performing such everyday activities as reading or
conversing. However, the capacity of short-term memory is quite limited. Studies have shown consistently that
416

Long-term memory contains information that has
been stored for longer periods of time, ranging from a
few minutes to a lifetime. When translating information
for long-term memory, the brain uses meaning as a primary method for encoding. When attempting to recall a
list of unrelated words, for instance, subjects often try to
link the words in a sentence. The more the meaning of
the information is elaborated, the more it will be recalled. Voices, odors, and tastes also are stored in longterm memory, which indicates that other means of encoding besides meaning, are also used. Items are regularly transferred back and forth from short-term to longterm memory. For example, rehearsing facts can transfer
short-term memory into long-term. The chunking
process in long-term memory can increase the capacity
of short-term memory when various chunks of information are called upon to be used.
The breakdown in the retrieval of information from
either memory can be the result of various factors, including interference, decay, or storage problems. In addition, researchers believe it is unlikely that all experiences or facts are stored in memory and thus are available for retrieval. Emotional factors, including anxiety,
also contribute to memory failure in certain situations.
Test anxiety, for example, may cause a student to forget
factual information despite how well it has been
learned. Amnesia, a partial or total loss of memory,
may be caused by stroke, injury to the brain, surgery, alcohol dependence, encephalitis, and electroconvulsive
therapy (ECT).
Many methods can be used to improve memory.
Long-term memory may be improved using mnemonic,
or memory-aiding, systems. One, the “method of loci”
system, encourages an association between various images and unrelated words. The “key word” method of
learning a foreign language links the pronunciation of a
new word with a picture that corresponds to the sound of
the word. Context is another powerful memory aid that
recognizes that people recall more easily facts or events

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Memory

FALSE AND RECOVERED MEMORIES
As of the late 1990s, research into recovered memories was characterized by tremendous controversy. A
leading researcher in this subject, Elizabeth Loftus, conducted studies on over 20,000 subjects, and pointed to
evidence she felt was convincing that memory is both
fragile and unreliable. Her work supported, the notion
that eyewitness accounts of events are often inaccurate,
and that false memories can be created through suggestion in approximately 25% of the population. Loftus’s
work calls into question the validity of memories that
are recovered under coaching or questioning; such
memories have provided the basis for countless lawsuits
brought against adults who are accused of molesting
children. Her research has shown that emotional state—
either low points, such as boredom or sleepiness or high
points, such as stress or trauma—decrease the reliability
of memory. She has also shown that experiencing violent and traumatic events decreases the accuracy of
memory. Loftus theorizes that memory is suggestible
and deteriorates over time. In her classic study, known
as “Lost in the Shopping Mall,” she demonstrated that
subjects—children and teenagers—could be induced to
remember being lost in a mall at an early age, even
though it never actually happened, by simply questioning them about it as if it had happened.

One of the problems with the recovery of repressed
memories is the very process of recovery. Many individuals recover memories while in therapy, under hypnosis, or
in some other situation where the possibility of suggestion
is powerful. In the late 1990s, in response to the swelling
controversy over recovered memories, the American Medical Association, American Psychiatric Association, and
American Psychological Association all issued guidelines
to help practitioners deal with reports of recovered memories, especially of sexual abuse during childhood. In general, most physicians, psychiatrists, and psychologists suggest that recovered memories be corroborated through external investigation, and that alternative explanations for
the existence of the memories be considered before any
legal action be taken based on them.

more easily if they are placed in the same environment
in which they learned them. For example, a person is
more likely to recall specific memories from high school
if they go to the school and retrace their paths.

memory has been recovered under coaching. Researcher
Elizabeth Loftus, who conducted studies on 20,000 subjects, found that false memories could be created through
suggestion in 25% of the population; eye witness accounts, she found, are often inaccurate. The emotional
state of either low points, such as boredom or sleepiness
or high points, such as stress or trauma, decrease the accuracy of memory, Loftus found. She theorizes that
memory deteriorates over time and is vulnerable to suggestion. In one study, known as “Lost in the Shopping
Mall,” Loftus demonstrated that subjects, children and
teenagers, could be induced to remember being lost in a
mall at an early age by simply questioning them about
the experience as if it happened.

Imposing a meaningful organization on an unrelated
group of facts or words also improves memory. The
EGBDF notes that represent the lines on a musical staff
often are recalled using the sentence, “Every good boy
does fine.” The sentence has nothing to do with music;
rather, it places a meaning on letters that, at first glance,
seem random. Another notable mnemonic system, the
PQRST method, is helpful in assisting students learn
textbook material. The letters correspond to the five
steps of the method: preview, question, read, self-recitation and test.
Questions of the reliability and fragility of memory
have surrounded the controversy of false and recovered
memory that surface under questioning primarily by psychotherapists. As lawsuits based upon recovered memory
have been filed against adults accused of molesting children and in at least one case, the death of a childhood
friend, recovered memories have come under scrutiny
and questions raised about the validity, especially when

False memory syndrome is dividing the field of professional psychotherapy. Some psychotherapists believe
that to question the interpretation of and belief in recovered memories is to undermine the possibility of the existence of repression; others see the challenge to recovered
memories as a sign of society’s refusal to confront a serious problem with child abuse and abuse of women. Others contend that there are no psychoanalytic theories to
support forgetting of traumatic events, or their detailed
recall after the passage of time.

In response to increasing controversy over recovered
memories, the American Medical Association, American
Psychiatric Association and American Psychological Association all issued guidelines to help practitioners deal
with reports of recovered memories, especially of sexual
abuse during childhood. Before any legal action is taken
based on recovered memories, most physicians, psychiatrists, and psychologists suggest that recovered memories receive corroboration through external investigation
and an alternative explanation for the existence of the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

417

Mental age

memories be considered. The field of professional psychotherapy is divided on false memory syndrome. To
question the interpretation of and belief in recovered
memories undermines the possibility of the existence of
repression, according to some psychotherapists; others
see the challenge to recovered memories as coming from
a refusal by society to confront a serious problem with
child abuse and abuse of women. Yet others contend
there are no psychoanalytic theories to support forgetting
traumatic events or support their detailed recall after the
passage of time.
See also Mnemonic strategies; Serial learning; Serial position function
Further Reading
Bartlett, Frederic C. Remembering: A Study in Experimental
and Social Psychology New York: Cambridge University
Press,1995.
Damasio, Antonio. Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason, and
the Human Brain.. New York: G.P. Putnam, 1994.
Loftus, Elizabeth F. and Ketcham, Katherine. The Myth of Repressed Memory: False Memories and Allegations of Sexual Abuse. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994.
Rubin, David C. Remembering Our Past: Studies in Autobiographical Memory. Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Schacter, Daniel L. Searching for Memory: The Brain, the
Mind, and the Past. New York: Basic Books, 1996.

Mental age
A scale used to correlate intelligence to the typical
changes that occur as a child matures.

French psychologist and educator Alfred Binet theorized that a child who appears to have limited mental
abilities is able to perform on a level characteristic of
younger children; conversely, a child who appears to be
gifted is able to perform on the level of older children. In
1905 Binet, in collaboration with Thèophile Simon, developed a scale on which mental age could be compared
to the chronological age. Thus, a bright child’s mental
age is higher than his or her chronological age.
In 1916, Lewis Terman, a psychologist at Stanford
University, devised an intelligence test based on Binet’s
work (referred to today as the Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale) and was administered to assess American
school children. Terman maintained the concept of mental age in devising his formula for calculating the intelligence quotient (IQ). The formula is IQ = mental
age/chronological age multiplied by 100. Thus if the
child’s mental age equals her chronological age, her IQ
will equal 100.
418

Mental health
Personal well-being, characterized by self-acceptance and feelings of emotional security.

After decades of concentrating on mental illness
and emotional disorders, many psychologists during the
1950s turned their focus toward the promotion of mental
health. Attempts to prevent mental illness joined the emphasis on treatment methods, and promotion of “selfhelp” in many cases replaced the dependence on professionals and drug therapies. American psychologist Gordon Allport (1897-1967) viewed the difference between
an emotionally healthy person and a neurotic one as the
difference in outlook between the past and the future.
Healthy people motivate themselves toward the future;
unhealthy ones dwell on events in the past that have
caused their current condition. Allport also considered
these qualities characteristic of mentally healthy individuals: capacity for self-extension; capacity for warm
human interactions; demonstrated emotional security
and self-acceptance; realistic perceptions of one’s own
talents and abilities; sense of humor, and a unifying philosophy of life such as religion.
In the United States, the Community Mental Health
Centers Act of 1963 attempted to localize and individualize the promotion of personal well-being. Community
mental health centers were established for outpatient treatment, emergency service, and short-term hospitalizations.
Professional therapists and paraprofessionals consulted
with schools, courts, and other local agencies to devise
and maintain prevention programs, particularly for young
people. Halfway houses enabled formerly ill patients to
make an easier transition back to everyday life. Youth centers provided an available source of counseling for jobs
and personal problems. Hot lines became staffed 24 hours
a day in attempts to prevent suicide and child abuse.
Aided in large part by these community mental health
centers, mental health professionals have strived to reduce
the severity of existing disorders through the use of traditional therapies, the duration of disorders that do occur,
and the incidence of new mental illness cases. In addition,
attempts have been to decrease the stigma attached to
mental illness by making mental health services more
commonly available. Self-help strategies have also played
an important role in the mental health arena. People with
particular anxieties are encouraged to reduce them
through training. For example, people afraid to speak in
public are encouraged to take classes to help them cope
with their anxiety and overcome it so that it does not interfere with their personal or professional lives. The proliferation of self-help support groups are also outgrowths of
the efforts to personalize, rather than institutionalize, men-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Mental illness

tal health care. People who participate in such groups not
only learn to cope with the stresses that erode their wellbeing, they also receive the social support thought to be
equally important in building strong mental health.
Further Reading
Hergenhahn, B.R. An Introduction to Theories of Personality.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1980.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. Glenview, IL: Scott,
Foresman, 1988.

Mental hospitals
Institutions for the mentally ill, formerly called asylums, and now called psychiatric institutions.

Beginning in the Middle Ages, mental hospitals
were basically prisons. By the end of the eighteenth century, the term asylum was used, and some reforms were
being implemented when the notion was introduced that
psychological disturbances, like physical ailments, could
be viewed as diseases requiring treatment rather than
crimes calling for imprisonment. By the late 1800s, reactions against conditions in mental hospitals led to a reform movement in the care and treatment of people with
mental disorders. The Mental Health Act of 1946 and the
Community Mental Health Centers Act of 1963 allotted
federal funds for the establishment of community treatment centers, which provide a variety of services—including short-term and partial hospitalization—in an effort toward the deinstitutionalization of mental patients.
As of the late 1990s, institutions for the treatment of
mental disorders are called psychiatric institutions.
These institutions—along with mental health centers and
halfway houses—form a system for treatment of mental
disorders at all levels of severity.
Further Reading
Wyer, Robert S., Jr., ed. Knowledge and Memory: The Real
Story. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1995.
Hartmann, Ernest. Boundaries in the Mind: A New Psychology
of Personality Difference. New York: Basic Books, 1991.

Many mental hospitals are modernizing their treatment
methods, including this one with patients participating in
dance therapy. (Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with
permission.)

Overview
Mental illness is a serious public health problem.
According to the World Health Organization and the
Harvard School of Public Health, mental illness accounts
for nearly 11 percent of total worldwide disease burden.
(Disease burden is determined by the calculation of
DALYs, or disability-adjusted life years. The DALY statistic measures lost years of healthy life from death or
disability due to a disease.) In countries that are considered “established market economies” (i.e., United States,
Great Britain), mental illness is second only to heart disease as the most disabling disease category. Unipolar
major depression was determined to be the second leading source of disease burden (after ischemic heart disease) in established market economies, and the fourth
leading cause of disease burden worldwide.
In its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV), a reference standard for mental health professionals, the American
Psychiatric Association distinguishes 16 different subtypes (or categories) of mental illness. These include:

See also Institutionalization

• Disorders usually first diagnosed in infancy childhood,
or adolescence. These include learning and developmental disorders, mental retardation, and attentiondeficit hyperactivity disorder.

Mental illness

• Delirium, dementia, amnestia, and other cognitive disorders. These include dementia related to Alzheimer’s
disease, head injury, and central nervous system infection; and substance-induced delirium.

The term used to describe a disorder or condition
that negatively affect cognition (thought), behavior,
and/or affect (mood) to such a point where it causes a significant amount of distress and functional
impairment for a prolonged period of time.

• Mental disorders due to a general medical condition.
Medical/mental conditions that are not classified in
other areas of the DSM-IV are found in this category.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

419

Mental illness

• Substance-related disorders. Disorders related to alcohol and drug use, abuse, dependence, and withdrawal
are included in this category.
• Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders. These include the schizoid disorders (schizophrenia, schizophreniform, and schizoaffective disorder), delusional
disorder, and psychotic disorders.
• Mood disorders. Depressive disorders (major, dysthymic) and bipolar disorders are classified as mood
disorders.
• Anxiety disorders. This classification includes panic
disorder, agoraphobia, social phobia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, posttraumatic stress disorder, and
generalized anxiety disorders, all disorders in which a
certain situation or place triggers excessive fear and/or
panic symptoms (i.e., dizziness, racing heart).
• Somatoform disorders. Somatoform disorders involve
clinically significant physical symptoms that cannot be
explained by a medical condition. Somatization disorder, conversion disorder, pain disorder, hypochondriasis, and body dysmorphic disorder.
• Factitious disorders. These are disorders in which the
individual creates and complains of symptoms of a
non-existent illness in order to assume the role of a patient (or sick role).
• Dissociative disorders. These disorders involve a
change in memory, identity, and/or consciousness.
They include dissociative amnesia, dissociative fugue,
dissociative identity disorder, and depersonalization
disorder.
• Sexual and gender identity disorders. Disorders of sexual desire, arousal, performance, and pain are included
here, as is gender identity disorder. It should be noted
that the inclusion of gender identity disorder as a
mental illness in the DSM-IV has been a point of some
contention among mental health professionals.
• Eating disorders.Anorexia and bulimia are both eating
disorders.
• Sleep disorders. Insomnia, narcolepsy, hypersomnia,
and parasomnias (nightmares and sleepwalking) are
all considered sleep disorders.
• Impulse-control disorders not elsewhere classified. Includes kleptomania and pyromania.
• Adjustment disorders.Adjustment disorders involve
an excessive emotional or behavioral reaction to a
stressful event.
• Personality disorders. These are maladjustments of
personality, including paranoid, schizoid, schizotypal,
antisocial, borderline, histrionic, narcissistic, avoidant,
dependent, and obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (not to be confused with the anxiety disorder
OCD).
420

Causes and symptoms
The causes of mental illness are not completely understood, but organic, genetic (hereditary), familial,
traumatic life events, and social factors all may play a
part in triggering mental illness. Frequently, it is a combination and interrelationship of several of these factors. For example, schizophrenia is caused by genetically determined abnormalities in the structure and
chemistry of the brain, but the course and severity of
the disease can be influenced by social factors such as
environmental stress and the absence of a family or
peer support system.
In some cases, mental illness is primarily a byproduct of a disease or general medical condition. For example, central nervous system infections that can occur in
advanced AIDS can cause dementia. Depending on their
location and severity, neurological conditions such as
traumatic brain injury, tumor, or infarct (areas of tissue
death as a result of loss of blood supply) can also cause
various symptoms of mental illness.
Individuals dealing with traumatic life events
(e.g., death of a close friend, experiencing a natural disaster, witnessing a brutal crime) may experience psychological distress and difficulty dealing with day-today tasks. Because these mental health problems tend
to be of a temporary nature, they aren’t termed mental
illness. It is important to remember that prompt and
proper treatment of these issues in the form of counseling or other psychological interventions is critical, as
they have the potential to progress into a long-term
mental disorder or illness.

Diagnosis and treatment
Patients with symptoms of mental illness should undergo a thorough physical examination and patient history to rule out an organic or structural cause for the illness. If a neurological cause for the disorder is suspected, further diagnostic tests (e.g., CT scan, MRI, PET
scan, neuropsychological assessments) are typically required. If a disorder with no organic cause is suspected, a
psychologist or other mental healthcare professional will
conduct a patient interview and administer one or more
psychological assessments (also called clinical inventories, scales, or tests).
Counseling is typically a front-line treatment for
mental illness. A number of counseling or talk therapy
approaches exist, including psychotherapy, cognitive
therapy, behavioral therapy, and group therapy. These
are sometimes used in conjunction with alternative therapy approaches such as art or music therapy that use the
creative process to promote patient self-discovery and

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Psychoactive medication is prescribed for symptom
relief in patients with organic and non-organic mental illness. For mental illnesses that are considered biological
in nature, such as bipolar disorder or schizophrenia,
pharmaceutical therapy is considered a primary treatment approach. In other cases, such as in personality disorder or dissociative disorder, psychoactive medications
are usually considered a secondary, or companion treatment to psychotherapy.
Many individuals suffering from mental illness
choose to treat their illness through regular attendance in
self-help groups, where they can seek advice and counsel from others in similar circumstances. Some of the
most popular self-help organizations (i.e., Alcoholics
Anonymous), are as, if not more, effective than traditional doctor/patient therapy for many individuals.
In some cases, effectively treating mental illness requires hospitalization of the patient. This hospitalization,
also known as inpatient treatment, is usually employed
in situations where a controlled therapeutic environment
is critical for the patient’s recovery (e.g., rehabilitation
treatment for alcoholism or other drug addictions), or
when there is a risk that the patient may harm himself
(suicide) or others. One popular variation of the inpatient
treatment program, known as milieu therapy, focuses on
providing the patient with opportunities to gain self-confidence and interact with peers in a positive way. Activities that encourage self-discovery and empowerment
such as art, music, dance, and writing are important
components of this approach.

Mental imagery
A picture created by the imagination with no visual
stimulus required.

Mental images are created by the brain from memories, imagination, or a combination of both. In the
1990s, scientists were gaining knowledge of how the
brain forms these visual pictures without input from the
eyes. According to researchers at Harvard University, the
brain may generate these mental pictures in the area of
the brain responsible for vision. Stephen Kosslyn, a psychologist, used positron emission tomography (PET)
technology to examine the flow of blood in the brains of
twelve men. The men were asked to close their eyes and
imagine total darkness. Subsequently, they were asked to
imagine a series of different items. The tests seem to indicate that the primary visual cortex, the area of the brain
that interprets vision, was activated when creating the
imagined images.
See also Daydreaming; Dreams; Fantasy
Paula Ford-Martin
Further Reading
Bower, Bruce. “Brain Scans Set Sights on Mind’s Eye.” Science News (December 2, 1995): 372.

Mental retardation
Below-average intellectual abilities that are present
before the age of 18 and interfere with developmental processes and with the ability to function
normally in daily life (adaptive behavior).

Further Reading
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders 4th ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press, Inc., 1994.
World Health Organization, World Bank, and Harvard University. Murray CL, Lopez AD, eds. The Global Burden of
Disease: A comprehensive assessment of mortality and
disability from diseases, injuries, and risk factors in 1990
and projected to 2020. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Satcher, David. Mental Health: A Report of the Surgeon General. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, 1999.
[available online at www.surgeongeneral.gov]

Further Information
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). 6001 Executive
Boulevard, Rm. 8184, MSC 9663, Bethesda, MD, USA.
20892-9663, fax: 301-443-4279, 301-443-4513. Email:
nimhinfo@nih.gov. http://www.nimh.nih.gov.

The term mental retardation is commonly used to
refer to people with an intelligence quotient (IQ) below
70. An IQ of 80-130 is considered the normal range, and
100 is considered average. According to the definition in
the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual (DSM-IV), a mentally retarded person is significantly limited in at least two of the following areas: self-care, communication, home living, social/interpersonal skills, self-direction, use of community
resources, functional academic skills, work, leisure,
health, and safety. Mental retardation affects roughly 1%
of the American population. According to the U.S. Department of Education, about 11% of school-aged children were enrolled in special education programs for
students with mental retardation.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

421

Mental retardation

awareness. A number of mental healthcare professionals
are involved in the treatment of mental illness, including
licensed counselors and therapists, social workers, nurses, psychologists, and psychiatrists.

Mental retardation

There are four categories of mental retardation:
mild, moderate, severe, and profound. The roughly 80%
of retarded persons who are classified as mildly retarded
have an IQ between 50 or 55 and 70. Mild retardation,
which may not be detected in early childhood, usually
involves little sensorimotor impairment. Persons in this
category can be educated up to a sixth-grade level. With
adequate vocational guidance, they can live and work
productively in the community as adults, either independently or with some degree of supervision.
About 10% of retarded persons are classified as
moderately retarded, with IQs generally between 35 and
50. Although they usually do not progress beyond the
second-grade level academically, as adults they can take
care of themselves within supervised settings and perform unskilled or semiskilled work.
Persons with severe retardation, who account for 34% of the retarded population, have serious language
and motor impairment. They usually do not speak in
early childhood but can learn communication and basic
self-care during the school years. Their language skills
may be limited to the most basic functional words necessary to meet their daily needs. As adults, they live either with their families, in group homes, or, when necessary, in facilities that can provide skilled medical or
nursing care.
Profound retardation, which accounts for 1-2% of
the retarded population, is usually associated with a neurological condition. It is characterized by severe sensorimotor difficulties beginning in early childhood and serious long-term limitations on both communication and
the ability to care for oneself. Some profoundly retarded
individuals are never able to speak or to be toilet trained.
Most need constant care throughout their lives.
In addition to the categories of mild, moderate, severe, and profound retardation, separate categories are
sometimes used to designate those retarded persons
who can benefit from some degree of academic training. Those designated “educable mentally retarded”
(EMR) can handle academic work at a third- to sixthgrade level, and usually have IQs that fall between 50
and 75. The “trainable mentally retarded” (TMR) have
IQs of between 30 and 50 and can progress as far as
second-grade level work. It is important to note that IQ
scores are not foolproof ways of detecting the abilities
and potential of mentally retarded children. Some children with lower IQs ultimately prove to be more capable of leading independent, productive lives than others
who score higher. Factors such as emotional support,
medical attention, and vocational training can play as
great a role as IQ in determining the future of a retarded child.
422

Causes of mental retardation
There are many different causes of mental retardation, both biological and environmental. In about 5% of
cases, retardation is transmitted genetically, usually
through chromosomal abnormalities, such as Down syndrome or fragile X syndrome. Down syndrome occurs
when there is an extra chromosome in the 21st pair of
chromosomes (known as trisomy 21). People with Down
syndrome have 47 chromosomes instead of the normal
46. The disorder occurs in one out of every 600-700
births worldwide. Women over 35 are at greater risk of
bearing a child with Down syndrome than younger
women, and Down syndrome births are over 20 times
more likely in women over 45 than in those under the age
of 30. Children and adults with Down syndrome demonstrate both mental and motor retardation. Most are severely retarded, with IQs between 20 and 49, and prone
to a number of physical problems, including poor vision,
hearing and heart defects, and low resistance to respiratory infections. Individuals with Down syndrome (formerly called mongoloidism) also have distinctive physical features, including upward-slanting, almond-shaped
eyes and a short, stocky build with a short neck and a
smaller than average skull, which is usually flat in back.
Besides Down syndrome, the chromosomal condition that most commonly causes mental retardation is
fragile X syndrome, in which a segment of the chromosome that determines gender is abnormal. Fragile X syndrome primarily affects males, in whom the incidence of
the condition is 1 in 1,000, as opposed to 1 in 2,500 for
females. Males with fragile X syndrome tend to have
long, thin faces with prominent ears and jaws, and they
often have characteristics of autism. Some researchers
suspect that as many as 15% of people diagnosed with
autism actually have fragile X syndrome. About 20% of
genetically caused mental retardation results from single
gene mutations, including Tay-Sachs disease, phenylketonuria (PKU), and metachromatic leukodystrophy.
Mental retardation may be caused by problems that
occur during pregnancy and birth, including maternal
nutritional deficiencies, toxemia, infections such as
rubella, maternal phenylketonuria (even if the fetus doesn’t have the condition), use of drugs or alcohol, maternal
injury during pregnancy, extreme prematurity, low birth
weight, perinatal injury, or lack of oxygen at birth. Retardation can also be the result of medical conditions and
injuries that occur after birth, including metabolic disorders, severe childhood malnutrition, prolonged high
fever, near drowning, lead poisoning, severe mental disorders such as autism, and infections such as meningitis
that affect the brain. Environmental factors influencing
mental retardation include deprivation of physical or

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Mentally retarded people are more prone to both
physical and mental disorders than the general population. Some of the conditions that cause mental retardation may also be characterized by seizures, hearing problems, congenital heart defects, and other symptoms.
Mental disorders are much more common among the
mentally retarded than among the general population: an
estimated one million Americans have some degree of
mental retardation as well as a mental disorder of some
kind. The most severely retarded appear to be most at
risk for mental disorders, and the more severe the retardation the more serious the disorder. Diagnosis and treatment of these disorders can be especially difficult due to
communication problems. In addition, mental illness in
the retarded may also be caused by the stresses, frustrations, and loneliness they encounter in daily life. Depression, for example, is a common disorder of the mentally retarded, and one that often goes undiagnosed. In
spite of their limited intellectual capabilities, retarded
children realize that they are different and that other people are often uncomfortable around them. Professional
counseling, along with parental love and attention, can
help a retarded child maintain a positive self-image,
which is crucial to the ability to function effectively with
family, peers, and in the larger community.

Preventive measures
Some types of mental retardation can be prevented
through genetic counseling to determine the risk of a couple having a retarded baby. Other prenatal preventative
measures include ensuring that a pregnant mother has adequate nutrition and immunization against infectious diseases; monitoring to screen for fetal abnormalities that
are associated with mental retardation; and reduced use
of drugs and alcohol by women during pregnancy. Following the birth of a child, the chances of retardation can
be reduced by maintaining good nutrition for both the
nursing mother and the young child; avoiding environmental hazards such as lead; and providing the child with
emotional, intellectual, and social stimulation.
Another important preventative measure is early detection of certain metabolic and nutritional conditions
that result in mental retardation following a period of degeneration. Screening for certain disorders is mandatory
in most states. Hypothyroidism, which affects 1 in 4,000
infants born in the United States, can be prevented if a
thyroid hormone is administered by the first month of an
infant’s life. However, if the condition goes untreated, it
will cause impaired mental development in 20% of af-

fected children by the age of three months, and in 50%
by the age of six months. Phenylketonuria (PKU) prevents an infant from metabolizing the amino acid
phenyalanine. Reducing the amount of this substance in
an infant’s diet can prevent retardation. Infants with
galactosemia lack the enzyme needed to convert the
sugar galactose to glucose. Avoiding milk and certain
other dairy products prevents galactose from accumulating in the blood and eventually interfering with the
child’s normal mental development. However, none of
the preceding measures can be taken if the conditions involved are not detected, and most are undetectable without screening.
The symptoms of mental retardation are usually evident by a child’s first or second year. In the case of Down
syndrome, which involves distinctive physical characteristics, a diagnosis can usually be made shortly after birth.
Mentally retarded children lag behind their peers in developmental milestones such as sitting up, smiling, walking, and talking. They often demonstrate lower than normal levels of interest in their environment and responsiveness to others, and they are slower than other children
in reacting to visual or auditory stimulation. By the time a
child reaches the age of two or three, retardation can be
determined using physical and psychological tests. Testing is important at this age if a child shows signs of possible retardation because alternate causes, such as impaired
hearing, may be found and treated.
There is no cure for mental retardation once it has
occurred. Treatment programs are geared toward helping
retarded children reach their own full potential, not toward helping them catch up with their peers who aren’t
retarded. Nevertheless, this type of habilitative intervention can prepare most retarded people to lead fulfilling
and productive lives as active members of their communities. All states are required by law to offer early intervention programs for mentally retarded children from the
time they are born. The sooner the diagnosis of mental retardation is made, the more the child can be helped. With
mentally retarded infants, the treatment emphasis is on
sensorimotor development, which can be stimulated by
exercises and special types of play. It is required that special education programs be available for retarded children
starting at three years of age. These programs concentrate
on essential self-care, such as feeding, dressing, and toilet
training. There is also specialized help available for language and communication difficulties and physical disabilities. As children grow older, training in daily living
skills, as well as academic subjects, is offered.
Counseling and therapy are another important type of
treatment for the mentally retarded. Retarded children as a
group are prone to behavioral problems caused by short
attention spans, low tolerance for frustration, and poor im-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

423

Mental retardation

emotional nurturance and stimulation. Altogether, there
are hundreds of possible causes of, or factors contributing to, mental retardation.

Merrill-Palmer scales of mental tests

pulse control. Behavior therapy with a mental health
professional can help combat negative behavior patterns
and replace them with more functional ones. A counselor
or therapist can also help retarded children cope with the
low self-esteem that often results from the realization that
they are different from other children, including siblings.
Counseling can also be valuable for the family of a retarded child to help parents cope with painful feelings about
the child’s condition, and with the extra time and patience
needed for the care and education of a special-needs child.
Siblings may need to talk about the pressures they face,
such as accepting the extra time and attention their parents
must devote to a retarded brother or sister. Sometimes parents have trouble bonding with an infant who is retarded
and need professional help and reassurance to establish a
close and loving relationship.
Current social and health care policies encourage
keeping mentally retarded persons in their own homes or
in informal group home settings rather than institutions.
The variety of social and mental health services available
to the mentally retarded, including pre-vocational and vocational training, are geared toward making this possible.
Further Reading
Beirne-Smith, Mary, et al., eds. Mental Retardation. New York:
Merrill, 1994.
Drew, Clifford J. Retardation: A Life Cycle Approach. Columbus: Merrill, 1988.
Grossman, Herbert J., et al, eds. AMA Handbook on Mental Retardation. Chicago: American Medical Association, 1987.
Matson, Johnny L., and James A. Mulick, eds. Handbook of
Mental Retardation. New York: Pergamon Press, 1991.

Further Information
American Association on Mental Deficiency (AAMD). 1719
Kalorama Rd. NW, Washington, DC 20009, (202)
387–1968.
Association for Retarded Citizens (ARC). P.O. Box 6109, Arlington, TX 76005, (817) 640-0204.
National Down Syndrome Congress. 1800 Dempster, Park
Ridge, IL 60068–1146, (708) 823–7550.

Merrill-Palmer scales of
mental tests
Intelligence test.

The Merrill-Palmer scales of mental tests are intelligence test for children aged 18 months to four years,
which can be used to supplement or substitute for the
Stanford-Binet test. Its 19 subtests cover language skills,
motor skills, manual dexterity, and matching ability.
They require both oral responses and tasks involving a
424

variety of materials including pegboards, formboards,
cubes, Kohs design blocks, buttons, scissors, sticks, and
strings. The following comprise about half of the Merrill-Palmer scales: the Color Matching Test; Buttoning
Test; Stick and String, and Scissors tests; Language Test;
Picture Formboards 1, 2, and 3; Nested Cubes; Copying
Test; Pyramid Test; and Little Pink Tower Test. The remaining Merrill-Palmer subtests are the Wallin Pegboards A and B; Mare-Foal Formboard; Seguin-Goddard
Formboard; Pintner-Manikin Test; Decroly Matching
Game; Woodworth-Wells Association Test; and the Kohs
Block Design Test. Resistance to the testing situation is
taken into account in scoring. The test is accompanied by
a detailed list of factors that can influence a child’s willingness to cooperate, and refused or omitted items are
considered when arriving at the total score, which may
then be converted and reported in a variety of ways, including mental age and percentile ranking.
Further Reading
Cohen, Libby G., and Loraine J. Spenciner. Assessment of
Young Children. New York: Longman, 1994.
McCullough, Virginia. Testing and Your Child: What You Should
Know About 150 of the Most Common Medical, Educational, and Psychological Tests. New York: Plume, 1992.
Wortham, Sue Clark. Tests and Measurement in Early Childhood Education. Columbus: Merrill Publishing Co., 1990.

Franz Anton Mesmer
1734-1815
German physician whose theories and practices
led to modern-day hypnotism.

The word “mesmerize” means to hold one’s attention as though that person were in a trance. Such was the
popularity of Franz Mesmer, whose unorthodox methods
of treating illness were highly popular with his patients.
Those methods were criticized and ultimately dismissed
by his contemporaries, and he lived out his days in obscurity. Yet his initial fame was the result of his successes with patients. Mesmer did not know the concept of
psychosomatic illness, but he did recognize the role the
mind played in disease. His practices evolved into hypnosis, which today is recognized by many as a valid and
highly effective means of treating certain conditions.
The son of a forester, Mesmer was born on May 23,
1734, in Iznang, in the German province of Swabia. He
did not begin college until he was 25, and when he first
enrolled at the University of Vienna he planned to study
law. He soon changed his mind and instead worked toward a medical degree, which he received in 1766. It was

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Franz Anton Mesmer

in his doctoral dissertation that he described his theory of
“animal gravitation,” in which health in humans is affected by the gravitational pull of the various planets.
Mesmer also believed that there was a specific though
unidentifiable fluid-like substance occurring in nature
that channeled this gravity.

Begins “animal magnetism” studies
Mesmer concluded that people did not need to rely
on planetary gravitational pull; rather, they could manipulate their health through the use of any magnetic force.
Today, some advocates of alternative medicine make use
of magnets, which, worn or passed over the body, are said
to restore balance or harmony and thus thwart disease.
Most scientists consider this to be nothing more than
quackery, and eighteenth-century Austrians were equally
skeptical. Nonetheless, Mesmer attracted a considerable
following and his practice became quite lucrative.
By 1775, Mesmer had revised his animal gravitation
theory, renaming it “animal magnetism.” He believed
that magnets were not necessary after all; the passing of
hands over the body were enough to create the necessary
magnetic forces.
Other physicians were especially harsh toward Mesmer and his practices, and they actually tried to bring
him up on charges of fraud. In addition, while there were
patients who had been “cured” by Mesmer, there were
many who had not been, and with the encouragement of
the established medical profession they began to threaten
legal action. Mesmer finally left Vienna in 1778, settling
in Paris. There he found many French patients who were
willing to engage in “Mesmerism.” In addition to the
magnetic forces, Mesmer also developed techniques to
put people in trancelike states he called “crises.” Mesmer
believed that these crises, whose side effects included
convulsion, actually acted as a means of forcing the body
fluid back to its proper flow.

Methods challenged in France
Mesmer remained popular in France for several
years, but the medical establishment there was no more
welcoming than the Austrian doctors had been. The controversy eventually reached King Louis XVI, who in
1784 appointed a group of scientists to examine Mesmer’s methods and present their conclusions. The commission included some of the leading scientific minds of
the day, including Antoine Lavoisier and Dr. Joseph Guillotin. Also on the commission was an American, Benjamin Franklin. The commission, perhaps not surprisingly, concluded that Mesmer’s techniques could not be
backed up with scientific evidence. Mesmer’s following

Franz A. Mesmer (Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with
permission.)

dropped off quickly after that pronouncement, and he left
Paris in 1785. He stayed briefly in Versailles, then went to
Switzerland, and finally returned to his native Germany.
It is interesting to note that although other scientists
and physicians found fault with Mesmer’s methods and
theories, they did not discount the idea of mind-over
matter treatment of illness. Franklin, in particular, believed that some diseases were more in the mind than in
the body; he acknowledged that in those cases the power
of suggestion could be enough to “cure” the disease.
Also, Mesmer truly believed in his treatment, and his
earnestness was no doubt the reason it took so much to
discredit him. A common quack would have been discovered years earlier.
Mesmer spent his remaining years quietly. He died
in Meersburg, Germany on March 5, 1815.
George A. Milite
Further Reading
Asimov, Isaac. Asimov’s Biographical Encyclopedia of Science
and Technology.. Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Company, 1982.
Daintith, John, et al. Biographical Encyclopedia of Scientists.
Philadelphia: Institute of Physics Publishing, 1994.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

425

Metapsychology

Mackay, Charles. Extraordinary popular delusions and the
madness of crowds. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
1932.

Metapsychology
Umbrella term used to describe the attempt to establish general principles to explain all psychological phenomena.

Metapsychology describes the effort to construct or
to postulate a systematic and comprehensive set of general principles encompassing all of psychology, specifically including elements that are theoretical in addition
to elements that are considered to have been empirically
demonstrated; also known as nomothetic psychology. In
classical Freudian psychoanalytical theory, the term
metapsychology is used in reference to the analysis of
the dynamic (instinctive), topological (association with
id, ego, or superego), and economic (allocation of psychic energy) aspects of mental processes. The term
metapsychology is sometimes used as a synonym of the
term parapsychology. Parapsychology is a field of study
that involves the investigation of paranormal phenomena, such as extrasensory perception, precognition,
telepathy, clairvoyance, and telekinesis, that are (presumably) not explainable in terms of scientifically established principles or natural laws.

Adolf Meyer
1866-1950
Swiss-born American psychiatrist who developed
the concept of psychobiology.

Adolph Meyer was born in Niederweningen, Switzerland, and received an extensive medical education in neurology in Zurich, obtaining his M.D. in 1892. He emigrated to the United States in the same year. Beginning in
1893, Meyer worked for several hospitals, including a
state hospital in Kankakee, Illinois, as a pathologist, and
the New York State Hospital Service Pathological Institute, where he was involved with the training of psychiatrists. Meyer later joined the faculty of Cornell Medical
College in New York City, where he served as professor of
psychiatry. In 1909 G. Stanley Hall (1844-1924), a prominent psychologist and former student of William James,
invited Meyer to Clark College in Worcester, Massachusetts, on the occasion of the college’s twentieth anniversary, where he met with Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung.
426

Adolf Meyer (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with
permission.)

In following year Meyer was appointed professor of psychiatry at Johns Hopkins University and director of its
Henry Phipps Psychiatric Clinic, which became an internationally renowned training center for psychiatrists.
Meyer became so influential in his adopted country
that he was known as “the dean of American psychiatry,”
and his work has had a wide influence on psychiatric
theory and practice. In Meyer’s view, the diagnosis and
treatment of a mental disorder must include a thorough
understanding of the patient as a whole person. This approach, which would today be termed “holistic,” involved studying the patient from various perspectives—
medical, biographical, educational, and even artistic. It
was this goal that led him to introduce the use of the individual case history, bringing together in one place information about a patient’s physical condition, past history, family life, work situation, and other facts that
could be relevant to treatment. Meyer also pioneered in
promoting visits to the patient’s family in order for the
psychiatrist to understand the environment in which the
patient lived, and to which he or she would return when
treatment was completed.
Meyer believed that the constituent elements of
human existence are actively interrelated, from the lowest

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Through therapy that addressed both short-term and
long-term problems, Meyer’s goal was to help the patient
adjust as well as possible to life and change. Part of the
therapy process consisted of aiding the patient in modifying unhealthy adjustments to his or her situation through
guidance, suggestion, and reeducation, which Meyer
called “habit training.” His emphasis on habits extended to
include schizophrenia, which he viewed as caused by
harmful habits acquired over a long period of time, in
combination with biological factors, including heredity.
Neurosis, Meyer believed, differed from psychosis in that
only a part of the personality was involved. He viewed
neurotic patients as suffering from unrealistic expectations
and the inability to accept themselves as they were.
Meyer, together with Clifford Beers, was also a
founder of the mental hygiene movement (and the one
who suggested its name). The goal of this movement was
to educate the public about mental illness and achieve
more humane treatment of institutionalized patients.
Meyer contributed significantly to the medical literature
on psychiatry. His papers were collected and published
in Collected Papers (1950-1952).

Middle years
While there is no exact consensus as to the age
range of this period of life, it generally refers to the
ages between approximately 40 and 60, with the
lower limit sometimes placed as low as age 35 and
the upper one as high as 65 years of age.

In Erik Erikson’s influential scheme of human development, middle age is the period in which an individual is presented with the developmental task of choosing
between ego stagnation (self-interest) and generativity,
the capacity to care for others and make a positive contribution to society by being productive in work, parenting, or other activities. Carl Jung characterized the mid-

dle years as a time for self-realization and the exploration of spiritual and social values once the practical
tasks of finding an occupation and establishing a family
have been accomplished.
For many people, middle age is a stable period in
which they are settled in a long-term love relationship,
have committed themselves to a career, and have established a family and a permanent home. The middle years
can also be a time of exploration and radical change,
sometimes fueled by the much-publicized “midlife crisis.” For some individuals, failure to achieve goals set
earlier in life or reassessment of those goals may produce discontent or even despair, resulting in major
lifestyle changes, both professional and personal. It is
important to note that personal and professional growth
at midlife may also be indicative of an individual’s socioeconomic status: the poor generally have less flexibility and fewer opportunities to make sweeping changes in
their lives at this stage.
The ability to realize one’s full potential in middle
age is also closely related to developmental experiences
earlier in life. Unresolved issues of childhood and adolescence are often felt keenly during this period, and the
greatest number of psychotherapy clients are thought to
be of middle aged. In addition, coping with aging parents and their eventual deaths compels middle-aged individuals to acknowledge their own mortality, resulting in
a restructuring of priorities. Professionally, people may
change careers, return to school, or enter into business
for themselves, voluntarily decreasing their earning potential or accepting a lower measure of financial security
in order to pursue their dreams while they still have a
chance. Some women who have stayed home to raise
children often reenter the job market at midlife, a challenge that can involve major personal reassessments and
lifestyle changes.
Women in midlife are confronted with the approaching end of their childbearing years and begin experiencing symptoms of menopause. Men commonly become
concerned about their levels of sexual prowess and activity in middle age. Affluent, well-educated men are especially prone to engaging in extramarital affairs at this
time, often with younger women. Both sexes also face
the disengagement of their children, first through the detachment of adolescence, and then when the children finally leave the family home.
Further Reading
Anderson, Clifford. The Stages of Life: A Groundbreaking Discovery: the Steps to Psychological Maturity. New York:
Atlantic Monthly Press, 1995.
Berger, Kathleen Stassen. The Developing Person Through the
Life Span. 2nd ed. New York: Worth Publishers, 1988.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

427

Middle years

biochemical level to the highest cognitive level. Arguing
that psychological factors may be as important as neuropathology in causing mental illness, Meyer advocated
integrating the studies of human psychology and biology
into a single system that he called psychobiology. The
goal of psychobiological therapy was the successful integration of different aspects of the patient’s personality.
Steps involved in this psychotherapy included analyzing
the psychological, sociological, and biological factors relevant to the patient’s illness; working with the patient on
a conscious level, staying close to the original complaint;
and utilizing a combination of treatment methods satisfactory to both psychiatrist and patient.

Milgram’s obedience experiment

Inglehart, Marita Rosc. Reactions to Critical Life Events: A
Social Psychological Analysis. New York: Praeger, 1991.
Zimbardo, Philip G. The Psychology of Attitude Change and
Social Influence. Philadelphia: Temple University Press,
1991.

_____. “Issues in the Study of Authority: A Reply to Baumrind,” American Psychologist, 1964.

Stanley Milgram
1933-1984
American experimental social psychologist known
for his innovative experimental techniques.

Milgram’s obedience
experiment
A controversial experiment on conformity and obedience conducted in the early 1960s.

Stanley Milgram (1933-1984), an American experimental psychologist at Yale University, conducted a series of experiments on conformity and obedience to authority. In these experiments, Milgram recruited subjects—ordinary citizens—through newspaper advertisements offering four dollars for one hour’s participation
in a “study of memory.” When the subject arrived at the
experimental laboratory, he or she was assigned the role
of “teacher,” and asked to read a series of word pairs to
another subject, or learner. The teacher-subject then
would test the learner’s ability to recall the pairs by
reading back the first word in each pair. Whenever the
learner made a mistake, the teacher-subject was instructed to administer punishment in the form of electric
shock. This instruction, by an authority figure or employer to administer pain to a human being, is at the
heart of the controversy.
The teacher-subject watched as the learner was
strapped into a chair and an electrode was attached to the
learner’s wrist. The teacher was encouraged by the experimenters to continue to administer the shocks. Milgram found that the 65 percent of the teacher-subjects
would continue to do what they were told, even though
the learners could be heard pleading and screaming, and
concluded that most people will follow the instructions
of an authority figure as long as they considered the authority as legitimate. Many psychologists and others
questioned the ethics of conducting such experiments,
where participants were encouraged, in the name of scientific experimentation, to inflict pain on others. Another
aspect of the controversy surrounding Milgram’s work
focused on the implications of his findings for the future
of societies and their authority figures.
Further Reading
Milgram, Stanley. “Behavior Study of Obedience.” Journal of
Abnormal Psychology, 1963.
_____. “Some Conditions of Obedience and Disobedience to
Authority,” Human Relations, 1965.
428

Stanley Milgram carried out influential and controversial experiments that demonstrated that blind obedience to authority could override moral conscience. His
early studies on conformity were the first experiments to
compare behavioral differences between people from
different parts of the world. Milgram also examined the
effects of television violence, studied whether New York
City subway riders would give up their seats if asked to
do so, and made award-winning documentary films.
Milgram, born in 1933 in the Bronx, New York, was
the son of Eastern European Jewish immigrants, Samuel
Milgram, a baker, and Adele Israel. Growing up in the
Bronx, with an older sister and a younger brother, Milgram attended James Monroe High School and graduated from Queens College in 1954. He had a majored in
political science and planned to enter the School of International Affairs at Columbia University to prepare for
the Foreign Service. Instead, he enrolled in Harvard University’s new interdisciplinary Department of Social Relations. There, Gordon Allport became his mentor and a
series of fellowships enabled him to earn his Ph.D. in social psychology in 1960.
At Harvard, Milgram became Solomon E. Asch’s
teaching assistant. Asch was applying Gestalt psychology to social relations and designing experiments to examine conformity. For his doctoral research, Milgram
spent a year in Norway and a year in France, exploring
the cultural differences in conformity. He found that
pressure for conformity was greater for Norwegians than
for the French. After returning from France, Milgram
worked with Asch at the Institute for Advanced Study in
Princeton, New Jersey.
Moving to Yale University in 1960, as an assistant
professor of psychology, Milgram began his experiments
on obedience, with funding from the National Science
Foundation. Much to his surprise, he found that 65% of
his subjects would inflict what they believed to be
painful electric shocks on others, simply because they
were told to do so.
Milgram married Alexandra “Sasha” Menkin, a psychiatric social worker, in 1961 and the couple eventually
had a daughter and a son. Returning to the Department of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In 1967, Milgram moved to the Graduate Center of
the City University of New York as professor and chairman of the social psychology program. In 1970 he published “The Experience of Living in Cities,” which had a
major influence on the new field of urban psychology.
He also examined how residents of New York and Paris
perceived the geographies of their cities. One of Milgram’s most unique social experiments, designed to
study the effects of television violence, involved an
episode of the CBS program “Medical Center,” with subjects viewing one of three endings. He found that viewers watching a violent ending were no more likely than
others to commit an antisocial act when given the opportunity. He also performed experiments with “cyranoids,”
intermediaries who communicated with someone using
words from a third person. He found, for example, that
listeners never suspected that an 11-year-old cyranoid’s
words were actually those of a 50-year-old professor. In
1980, in the midst of these experiments, Milgram suffered the first of a series of massive heart attacks. He
died of his fifth heart attack in New York City in 1984, at
the age of 51.
Margaret Alic

The psychology of military organization
Military psychologists are intimately involved in
testing recruits for intelligence and aptitude for military
specializations, and helping to find more effective ways
of training them. A critical subset of such testing focuses
on identifying and optimally training officers and other
leaders—a task that many practitioners admit is as much
art as science.
A whole field of study revolves around what military psychologists call group cohesion—the difficult-toquantify spirit of camaraderie, mutual trust, and confidence soldiers have in their unit. Studies have linked
high group cohesion to soldiers performing better both
as a team and individually; soldiers in units with good
group cohesion are less likely to suffer psychological
disability after combat.
Another military psychology subspecialty identifies
people who might prove emotionally unstable in military
life; in the nuclear era, this type of testing is especially
crucial. In addition, military personnel who are privy to
classified information are screened for psychological
conditions that might make them a security risk.
One of the most controversial areas in military psychology concerns the integration of nontraditional
groups into the often-conservative military society.
Through World War II and Korea, military psychologists
helped confirm that African Americans could be integrated into white units successfully. Today, military psychologists are trying to find ways to ease the introduction of
women into front-line units; some psychologists consider acceptance of gay troops as a future goal.

The psychology of military life

Further Reading
Milgram, Stanley. Obedience to Authority: an Experimental
View. New York: Harper & Row, 1974.
Milgram, Stanley. The Individual in a Social World: Essays
and Experiments. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1977.

Military psychology
The psychological study of military organization,
military life, and combat.

Military psychology, when defined broadly, can include a vast array of activities in psychological research,
assessment, and treatment. Military psychologists may be
either soldiers or civilians. The field can encompass every
aspect of the human mind that interests the military., but
researchers focus on the psychology of military organization, military life, and the psychology of combat.

Military life places unique stresses on individuals
and their families. Aside from the possibility of being
wounded or killed in combat, military service often involves long hours of work, extended absences from
home, and frequent transfer across the globe.
Some military psychologists research the sources of
marital discord among military families; interestingly
enough, some studies suggest that military life doesn’t
destabilize families, but it can bring already unstable
families to the breaking point. In some respects, clinical
military psychology is not very different from civilian
family practice, since military psychologists may treat
both soldiers and their civilian spouses and children.
The military has traditionally taken a harsh stance
with soldiers who risk their own and their comrades’
lives by abusing alcohol; but the macho culture has often
worked at cross-purpose to that stance. In Vietnam,
abuse of other drugs also became far more prevalent

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

429

Military psychology

Social Relations at Harvard in 1963 as an assistant professor of social psychology, Milgram used his “lost-letter
technique” to study people’s inclinations to help others
when it wasn’t required. These experiments examined
whether subjects would re-mail lost letters. Milgram also
addressed the “small-world problem,” determining that
any two individuals in the United States could reach each
other via an average of five acquaintances.

Minimal brain dysfunction

among American soldiers. While harsh punishments can
still occur, soldiers are now offered treatment for substance abuse as well.

tional problems among combat veterans in the absence of
psychological support that recognizes this problem.

The ethics of military psychology
The psychology of combat
Most soldiers never experience combat; but for
those who do, a lifetime of learning about the rules of society and morality must be suppressed in the interests of
survival. Military psychologists must help soldiers act
effectively in combat—and suffer a minimum of emotional fallout afterward.
One facet of the psychology of combat is integrating
humans with increasingly sophisticated weapons systems. Military psychologists are researching what display formats can help soldiers make split-second sense
out of complex computer-screen images that carry lifeor-death importance. Others focus on the effects of harsh
environmental effects such as weather on soldiers’ performance. Virtual reality has become an important focus
for more effective combat training.
Military psychologists also study the emotional aspects of combat. Early military psychologists suspected
that combat stress reaction (CRS)—a progressive psychological breakdown in response to combat—was a
matter of psychological “weakness.” Today, most agree
that any human being will break down if exposed for
long enough to enough death, fear, and violence.
Modern treatment for CSR stresses short-term desensitizing therapy and a quick return to combat. While
this may seem harsh and self-serving on the part of the
military, wartime studies indicate that soldiers with CSR
who are treated in this fashion are less likely to suffer
from post-traumatic stress disorder than those pulled to
rear-echelon units for treatment.
Some soldiers who have experienced battle—as well
as some victims of disasters or violent crime—suffer
from a lingering version of CSR called post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). A person with PTSD may
chronically re-experience traumatic events, in nightmares or even in waking hallucinations. Other PTSD
sufferers “close up,” refusing to confront their emotional
trauma but expressing it in substance abuse, depression,
or chronic unemployment. PTSD has proved possible but
difficult to treat successfully—hence the military’s focus
on preventing PTSD through proper CSR treatment.
One somewhat controversial school of thought holds
that the inhibition against killing is so strong that the emotional cost of killing—rather than fear of death or loss of
comrades—is the most defining aspect of CSR and PTSD.
Adherents believe that increasingly realistic weapons training conditions soldiers to kill reflexively—a desired outcome for the military, but one that can contribute to emo430

As both therapists with a duty to their patients and
subordinates with a duty to the military command structure, military psychologists must sometimes carry out a
tricky ethical balancing act. Patient confidentiality is a
particular problem, since commanders have the right to
examine their subordinates’ medical files when making
decisions in assignments, promotion, and punishment.
Military psychologists have been sanctioned by the
American Psychological Association for following legal
military orders that violated APA ethical rules; they have
also been disciplined by the military for following APA
rules that violate military regulations. Both the military
and the APA are working to establish clear guidelines to
help military psychologists avoid the trap of the “company doctor.”
See also Television and aggression
Kenneth B. Chiacchia
Further Reading
Cronin, Christopher (ed.) Military Psychology: An Introduction Simon and Schuster, 1998.
Grossman, Dave On Killing: The Psychological Cost of Learning to Kill in War and Society Little, Brown & Company,
1996.
Jeffrey, Timothy B., Robert J. Rankin, and Louise K. Jeffrey
“In Service of Two Masters: The Ethical-Legal Dilemma
Faced by Military Psychologists.” Professional Psychology: Research and Practice 23(2): 91-95 (1992).
Schwartz, T. P., and Robert M. Marsh. “The American Soldier
Studies of WWII: A 50th Anniversary Commemorative.”
Journal of Political and Military Sociology 27(1): 21-37
(1999).
Oei, Tian P. S., Bernard Lim, and Brian Hennessy. “Psychological Dysfunction in Battle: Combat Stress Reactions and
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder.” Clinical Psychology Review 10: 355-388 (1990).
Page, Gary D. “Clinical Psychology in the Military: Developments and Issues.” Clinical Psychology Review 16(5):
383-396 (1996).
Van Breda, Adrian D. “Developing Resilience to Routine Separations: An Occupational Social Work Intervention.”
Families in Society 80(6): 597-605 (1999).

Minimal brain dysfunction
A term often used either in connection (or interchangeably) with hyperactivity and/or attention
deficit disorder.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Minimal brain dysfunction has also been linked to
heredity; poor nutrition; exposure to toxic substances;
and illness in utero. Other symptoms that may be associated with the disorder include poor or inaccurate body
image, immaturity, difficulties with coordination, both
hypoactivity and hyperactivity, difficulty with writing or
calculating, speech and communication problems, and
cognitive difficulties. Secondary problems can include
social, affective, and personality disturbances.

noses, unless these are supported by further testing and
observable behavior. A sixth-grade reading level is required in order to take the test. However, a tape-recorded
version is available for those with limited literacy, visual
impairments, or other problems.
Further Reading
Aylward, Elizabeth H. Understanding Children’s Testing: Psychological Testing. Austin, TX: Pro-Ed, 1991.
Blau, Theodore H. The Psychological Examination of the
Child. New York: J. Wiley & Sons, 1991.
Knoff, Howard M. The Assessment of Child and Adolescent
Personality. New York: Guilford Press, 1986.
McCullough, Virginia. Testing and Your Child: What You Should
Know About 150 of the Most Common Medical, Educational, and Psychological Tests. New York: Plume, 1992.
O’Neill, Audrey Myerson. Clinical Inference: How to Draw
Meaningful Conclusions from Psychological Tests. Brandon, VT: Clinical Psychology Publishing Co., 1993.
Walsh, W. Bruce, and Nancy E. Betz. Tests and Assessment.
2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990.
Wodrich, David L., and Sally A. Kush. Children’s Psychological Testing: A Guide for Nonpsychologists. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing Co., 1990.

Salvador Minuchin
Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory
Gathers information on personality, attitudes, and
mental health.

The Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory
is a test used to gather information on personality, attitudes, and mental health of persons aged 16 or older
and to aid in clinical diagnosis. It consists of 556 truefalse questions, with different formats available for individual and group use. The MMPI is untimed and can
take anywhere from 45 minutes to 2 hours to complete.
This is normally done in a single session, but can be extended to a second session if necessary. Specific conditions or syndromes that the test can help identify include
hypochondriasis, depression, hysteria, paranoia, and
schizophrenia. Raw scores based on deviations from
standard responses are entered on personality profile
forms to obtain the individual results. There is also a validity scale to thwart attempts to “fake” the test. Because
the MMPI is a complex test whose results can sometimes
be ambiguous (and/or skewed by various factors), professionals tend to be cautious in interpreting it, often preferring broad descriptions to specific psychiatric diag-

1921Argentinian physician, one of the founders of family therapy and of structural family therapy.

The eldest of three children born to the children of
Russian-Jewish immigrants, Salvador Minuchin was
born and raised in a closely knit small Jewish community in rural Argentina. His father had been a prosperous
businessman until the Great Depression forced his family into poverty. In high school he decided he would help
juvenile delinquents after hearing his psychology teacher
discuss the philosopher Rousseau’s ideas that delinquents are victims of society.
At age 18 he entered the university as a medical student. In 1944, as a student, he became active in the leftist
political movement opposing the dictator Juan Peron
who had taken control of Argentina’s universities. He
was jailed for three months. Upon graduation in 1946 he
began a residency in pediatrics and took a subspecialty
in psychiatry. In 1948, as Minuchin was opening a pediatric practice, the state of Israel was created and immediately plunged into war. He moved to Israel and joined its
army where he treated young Jewish soldiers who had
survived the holocaust.
In 1950 he came to the Untied States to study psychiatry. He worked with psychotic children at Bellevue

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

431

Salvador Minuchin

Minimal brain dysfunction was formally defined in
1966 by Samuel Clements as a combination of average
or above average intelligence with certain mild to severe
learning or behavioral disabilities characterizing deviant
functioning of the central nervous system. It can involve impairments in visual or auditory perception, conceptualization, language, and memory, and difficulty
controlling attention, impulses, and motor function.
Minimal brain dysfunction is thought to be associated
with minor damage to the brain stem, the part of the
brain that controls arousal. A likely cause of this type of
damage is oxygen deprivation during childbirth. While
such damage does not affect intelligence, it does have an
effect on motor activity and attention span. Minimal
brain disorder usually does not become apparent until a
child reaches school age.

Salvador Minuchin

Hospital in New York City as a part-time psychiatric resident. Minuchin also worked at the Jewish Board of
Guardians where he lived in its institutional housing with
20 disturbed children. His training there was psychoanalytic, which did not seem compatible with his work with
the children.
In 1951 Minuchin married Patricia Pittluck, a psychologist, and emigrated to Israel. There he co-directed
five residential institutions for disturbed children . Most
of them were orphans of the holocaust and Jewish children from Asia and the Middle East. Here he first began
to work therapeutically with groups instead of individuals. Between 1954 and 1958, Minuchin trained at the
William Alanson White Institute of Psychoanalysis in
New York City. He went there because the Institute supported the ideas of Harry Stack Sullivan, who created
interpersonal psychiatry and stressed the importance of
interpersonal interaction. As he was training there, he
began practicing family therapy at the Wiltwyck
School for Boys, a school for troubled young people, or
juvenile delinquents. Slowly, he began to feel that he
needed to see a client’s family. He felt that seeing them
alone, as per psychoanalysis, was not an effective treatment technique.
Minuchin and a number of other professionals there
began working as a team to develop approaches to family therapy. These youths and their families tended not be
very introspective, so Minuchin and his team focused on
communication and behavior, and developed a therapy
form in which the therapist is very active, making suggestions and directing activities, for instance.
In 1965, Minuchin and his family (he now had two
children) moved to Philadelphia, where he became, at
the same time, director of psychiatry at Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, director of the Philadelphia Child
Guidance Clinic, and professor of child psychiatry at
the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine.
During this time he began working therapeutically with
children with psychosomatic illnesses. (Illnesses in
which no physical basis for an illness can be found so
the illness is attributed to psychological factors.) Research with these children and families indicated that
family therapy could help these patients improve, and
indicated maladaptive family patterns were partly to
blame for these illnesses.
During the 1960s and 1970s, Minuchin became interested in the larger social world in which families are
embedded. Thus he and his group started looking at
communities and social service agencies, among other
societal agents. In one project he and his colleagues,
under an intensive program, trained minorities from the
community to be family therapists.
432

During the 1960s, Minuchin and his colleagues, as
well as a number of other groups, struggled to understand family dynamics. He explored what other family
therapists and colleagues in the social sciences were
doing, and drew on those that seemed to work. He found
Gregory Bateson’s systems theory (a system is comprised of interdependent parts that mutually effect each
other) to go a long way in explaining family dynamics.
Minuchin also drew on the ideas of Nathan Ackerman,
a child analyst who began to look at the interpersonal aspects of the family unit, and the ways individual behavior relates to that unit. Minuchin believes these are perspectives that are complementary.
Very basically, structural family therapy uses shortterm methods to alter the coalitions and alliances of family members, and by doing so, alter how they experience
one another. Faulty family organization is responsible
for causing family maladjustment.
In 1975, Minuchin retired from his position as director of the Philadelphia Clinic. He was Director Emeritus
of the Clinic from 1975 through 1981. In 1981, Minuchin
established Family Studies, Inc., in New York City, an organization to teach family therapists. Minuchin left the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia in 1983, when
he joined New York University School of Medicine as a
Research Professor. His wife is also a Research Professor
there. He retired in 1996 and currently lives in Boston.
Minuchin has contributed to numerous professional
journals and coauthored numerous books, many of
which explore the effects of poverty and socials systems
on families.
Marie Doorey
Further Reading
Allyn & Bacon Family Therapy Website http://www.abacon.
com/famtherapy/
Foley, V. “Family Therapy.” In Corsini, R.J., ed. In Encyclopedia of Psychology, 1st Ed., V. 2 New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1984.
Goleman, Daniel. “Family Therapist Takes on Agencies.” New
York Times, (May 19, 1987).
Minuchin, Salvador, and Nichols, Michael . Family Healing:
Tales of Hope and Renewal from Family Therapy. New
York: The Free Press, 1993.
Writers Directory 2000, 15th Ed. Detroit, MI: Gale Group,
2000.

Further Information
New York University School of Medicine Department of Psychiatry. 550 First Avenue, New York, NY, USA. 10016.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Any technique used for the purpose of either assisting in the memorizing of specific material or improving the function of memory in general.

The basic coding procedure common to most
mnemonic strategies is to mentally associate, in some
manner, items of new or unfamiliar information with
various interconnected parts of a familiar, known whole.
Mnemonic devices range from the very simple to the remarkably complex. An example of a very simple
mnemonic device is the use of the acronymic word
HOMES to remember the names of the Great Lakes
(Huron, Ontario, Michigan, Erie, and Superior). An example of a remarkably complex mnemonic device is the
ancient Greek and Roman system of topical mnemonics,
in which a large imaginary house, or even a town full of
large imaginary houses, is intricately subdivided into
thousands of quadrates, or memory places, each of
which is available to be associated with an item of material to be remembered. The difficulties encountered in
the application of mnemonic strategies appear to increase as the amount of information to be mastered increases, and involve issues such as ambiguity, confusion,
and complexity.
There are several commonly employed mnemonic
devices. For example, the method of loci is a system
where objects to be remembered are imagined to be
arranged in geographical locations, or locations in a
building, the map or layout of which is well-known. The
learner uses this map or layout to remember unordered
items, such as a shopping list, by placing the grocery
items on the map, and recalling them later in a wellknown order. In this way, no items will be forgotten or
missed.

Higbee, Kenneth. Your Memory: How It Works and How to Improve It. New York: Paragon House, 1993.
Maguire, Jack. Your Guide to a Better Memory. New York:
Berkley Books, 1995.
Sandstrom, Robert. The Ultimate Memory Book: Remember
Anything Quickly and Easily. Granada Hills, CA: Stepping Stone Books, 1990.

Mode
One of the measures of central tendency in statistics.

In statistics, the mode is a descriptive number that
indicates the most frequently occurring score or scores in
a group of numbers. Along with the mean and the median, the mode constitutes the grouping of descriptive statistics known as measures of central tendency. Although
the mode is the easiest of the measures of central tendency to determine, it is the least used because it gives only
a crude estimate of typical scores.
See also Median; Mean
Further Reading
Peavy, J. Virgil. Descriptive Statistics: Measures of Central
Tendency and Dispersion. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Dept. of
Health and Human Services/Public Health Service, Centers for Disease Control, 1981.

EXAMPLE
124-125-128-129-129-130-130-130-130-131133-133-133
The mode is 130.

MNEMONIC DEVICE
FOR THE FIVE GREAT LAKES

Modeling
THIS MNEMONIC DEVICE CAN HELP THE
LEARNER REMEMBER THE NAMES OF THE FIVE
U.S. GREAT LAKES.

The process of learning by watching others; a therapeutic technique used to effect behavioral
change.

H - Huron
O - Ontario
M - Michigan
E - Erie
S - Superior

The use of modeling in psychotherapy was influenced by the research of social learning theorist Albert
Bandura, who studied observational learning in children,
particularly in relation to aggression. Bandura pioneered
the concept of vicarious conditioning, by which one
learns not only from the observed behavior of others but

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

433

Modeling

Mnemonic strategies

Further Reading

Modeling

also from whether that behavior is rewarded or punished.
Bandura concluded that certain conditions determine
whether or not people learn from observed behavior. They
must pay attention and retain what they have observed,
and they must be capable of and motivated to reproduce
the behavior. The effects of observed behavior are also
stronger if the model has characteristics similar to those of
the observer or is particularly attractive or powerful (the
principle behind celebrity endorsements). Bandura maintained that television offered a major source of modeling,
educating thousands of people to drink certain sodas or
use brand name soaps. Likewise, violence and death modeled on television influenced behaviors, according to some
social learning who cite the assassination attempt on President Ronald Reagan. John Hinckley made the attempt
after watching Taxi Driver 15 times. Four girls testified in
court that they watched Born Innocent before raping a
California girl with a bottle, similar to a scene in the
movie. Other theorists counter that television provides a
release, rather than a modeling for aggressive behavior. In
one study, researchers found that juvenile boys who
watched aggressive television shows were less likely to
exhibit violence than juvenile boys who did not.
Critics of modeling as an explanation for violent behavior maintain that the theory does not allow for differences in genetics, brain functioning and learning differences. Critics of the Bandura’s findings on aggression
maintain that the methods employed led to the outcome,
including high frustration levels of children because they
were not allowed to touch the toys.
As a therapeutic technique for changing one’s behavior, modeling has been especially effective in the
treatment of phobias. As with systematic
desensitization, an individual is exposed to the feared
object or situation in progressively anxiety-provoking
forms. However, this series of confrontations, instead of
being imagined or experienced directly, is first modeled
by another person. In symbolic modeling, the person receiving treatment has also had relaxation training, and
his or her task is to watch the series of modeled situations (live or on film) while remaining relaxed. As soon
as a situation or action provokes anxiety, it is discontinued and the observer returns to a state of relaxation. In
another effective technique, “live modeling with participation,” the observer actively imitates the behavior of a
live model in a series of confrontations with a feared object or situation. For example, persons being treated to
overcome fear of snakes watch and imitate a model.
They gradually progress from touching a snake with a
gloved hand to retrieving a loose snake bare-handed and
letting it crawl on their bodies.
In individual therapy sessions, the therapist may
model anxiety-producing behaviors while the client, re434

maining relaxed, first watches and then imitates them. In
therapy involving social skills and assertiveness training,
this technique may take the form of behavioral rehearsal, in which the therapist models and then helps the
client practice new, more socially adaptive behaviors.
Beyond phobias, modeling has wide application in
therapy. Therapists use the modeling technique to illustrate healthy behaviors that clients can learn by example
and practice in session. With children, the therapist models a variety of responses to difficult situations. In the situation of dealing with a classroom bully, the therapist models alternate responses in the context of a role play, where
the therapist acts as the child initially and the child assumes the role of the bully. Then roles reverse. The child
practices the behavior and responses modeled while the
therapist portrays the bully. In couples’ therapy, modeling
is used to teach listening and communications skills. With
quarreling couples, the therapist models responses to facilitate resolution rather than spiral the discussion downward into name-calling. Modeling has also been used effectively in anger management and in abuse cases.
Schools offer one of the largest arenas for modeling
where teachers first demonstrate the behavior they seek,
be it classroom decorum or how to work a long division
problem. Bandura maintains that self-efficacy may be influenced by modeling. A behavior modeled increases the
student’s belief about what is possible, enhancing the
student’s ability to accomplish the task set forth.
See also Imitation
Further Reading
Bandura, Albert. Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. New
York: W. H. Freeman, 1997.
Decker, Phillip J. and Nathan, Barry R.Behavior Modeling
Training: Principles and Application. New York: Praeger,
1985.

Maria Montessori
1870-1952
Innovative Italian educator.

Maria Montessori is best known for the progressive
method of education that bears her name. She earned her
medical degree from the University of Rome in 1894, the
first Italian woman to do so. A psychiatrist by training,
Montessorri worked with deprived and retarded children
at the Orthophrenic School in Rome starting in 1899.
Her observations of the educational challenges facing
these children lead to the formulation of her theories of
cognitive development and early childhood education.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Maria Montessori

As she observed the progress of pupils previously considered to be uneducable, Montessori pondered the poor
performance of normal children in regular schools.
These schools, she concluded, were unable to address
the individual educational needs of children and therefore stifled, rather than encouraged, learning. She described children in standard classrooms as butterflies
mounted on pins, wings motionless with useless knowledge. To see whether her ideas could be adapted to the
education of normal children, Montessori opened her
own school in 1907, the Casa dei Bambini, for 3-7-yearolds living in the tenements of Rome.
Montessori believed that children learn what they
are ready to learn, and that there may be considerable
differences among children in what phase they might be
going through and to what materials they might be receptive at any given time. Therefore, Montessori individualized her educational method. Children were free
to work at their own pace and to choose what they
would like to do and where they would like to do it
without competition with others. The materials in
Montessori’s classrooms reflected her value in self selected and pursued activity, training of the senses
through the manipulation of physical objects, and individualized cognitive growth facilitated by items that allowed the child to monitor and correct his or her own errors—boards in which pegs of various shapes were to be
fitted into corresponding holes, lacing boards, and sandpaper alphabets so that children could feel the letters as
they worked with them while beginning to read and
write, for example. While other schools at the beginning
of the 20th century emphasized rote learning and “toeing the line,” self absorption in discovery and mastery
tasks was the trademark of Montessori classrooms. Still,
her classrooms combined this seemingly playful self direction with Montessori self discipline and respect for
authority. Continued effort and progress was sustained
by the satisfaction and enjoyment children received
from mastering tasks and from engaging in activities
they themselves have chosen. Montessori believed that
these methods would lead to maximal independence for
each child from dressing him or herself to organizing
his or her day.
Interestingly, Montessori’s educational approach
also reflected the Darwinian notion that the development
of each individual is a microcosm of the development of
the entire species, or that “Ontogeny recapitulates phylogeny.” She therefore advocated that even young children be taught to grow plants and tend animals so that,
like their agrarian ancestors, they would ultimately
achieve the highest level of civilization.
In 1922 Montessori became the government inspector
of schools in Italy. She left Italy in 1934, traveled, and

Maria Montessori (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

eventually moved to the Netherlands where she died in
1952. Maria Montessori left behind a rich legacy. Her educational approach to young and special needs children
quickly became a popular progressive alternative to traditional classrooms. Today Montessori schools are common
in many communities, and even traditional approaches to
education embrace many of Montessori’s ideas.
Doreen Arcus Ph.D.
Further Reading
Britton, L. Montessori Play and Learn. New York: Crown,
1992.
Hainstock, E.G. Teaching Montessori in the Home: The
Preschool Years. New York: NAL-Dutto, 1976.
Hainstock, E.G. Teaching Montessori in the Home: The School
Years. New York: NAL-Dutton, 1989.
Montessori, M. The Montessori Method. 1939
Montessori, M. The Secret of Childhood. New York: Ballantine, 1982.
Montessori, M. Spontaneous Activity in Education. Cambridge, MA: Robert Bentley, 1964.

Further Information
American Montessori Society. 150 Fifth Avenue, Suite 203,
New York, NY 10011, (212) 924–3209.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

435

Mood

Mood
Loosely defined and subjectively experienced general emotional condition.

A mood, while relatively pervasive, is typically neither highly intense nor sustained over an extended period
of time. Examples of mood include happiness, sadness,
contemplativeness, and irritability. The definitions of
phrases to describe moods—such as good mood and bad
mood—are imprecise. In addition, the range of what is
regarded as a normal or appropriate mood varies considerably from individual to individual and from culture to
culture.
Further Reading
Kuiken, Don, ed. Mood and Memory. Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Publications, 1991.

See also Affect; Emotion

Moral development
The formation of a system of underlying assumptions about standards and principles that govern
moral decisions.

Moral development involves the formation of a system of values on which to base decisions concerning
“right” and “wrong, “ or “good” and “bad.” Values are
underlying assumptions about standards that govern
moral decisions.

sentially behaviorist approach). Psychoanalytic theory
proposes instead that morality develops through humans’
conflict between their instinctual drives and the demands
of society. Cognitive development theories view morality as an outgrowth of cognition, or reasoning, whereas
personality theories are holistic in their approach, taking
into account all the factors that contribute to human development.
The differences between these approaches rest on
two questions: 1) where do humans begin on their moral
journey; and 2) where do we end up? In other words,
how moral are infants at birth? And how is “moral maturity” defined? What is the ideal morality to which we
aspire? The contrasting philosophies at the heart of the
answers to these questions determine the essential perspective of each moral development theory. Those who
believe infants are born with no moral sense tend towards social learning or behaviorist theories (as all
morality must therefore be learned from the external environment). Others who believe humans are innately aggressive and completely self-oriented are more likely to
accept psychoanalytic theories (where morality is the
learned management of socially destructive internal drives). Those who believe it is our reasoning abilities that
separate us from the rest of creation will find cognitive
development theories the most attractive, while those
who view humans as holistic beings who are born with a
full range of potentialities will most likely be drawn to
personality theories.

Although morality has been a topic of discussion
since the beginning of human civilization, the scientific
study of moral development did not begin in earnest until
the late 1950s. Lawrence Kohlberg (1927-1987), an
American psychologist building upon Jean Piaget’s work
in cognitive reasoning, posited six stages of moral development in his 1958 doctoral thesis. Since that time,
morality and moral development have become acceptable subjects of scientific research. Prior to Kohlberg’s
work, the prevailing positivist view claimed that science
should be”value-free”—that morality had no place in
scientific studies. By choosing to study moral development scientifically, Kohlberg broke through the positivist
boundary and established morality as a legitimate subject of scientific research.

What constitutes “mature morality” is a subject of
great controversy. Each society develops its own set of
norms and standards for acceptable behavior, leading
many to say that morality is entirely culturally conditioned. Does this mean there are no universal truths, no
cross-cultural standards for human behavior? The debate
over this question fuels the critiques of many moral development theories. Kohlberg’s six stages of moral development, for example, have been criticized for elevating
Western, urban, intellectual (upper class) understandings
of morality, while discrediting rural, tribal, working class,
or Eastern moral understandings. (See Kohlberg’s theory
of moral reasoning. ) Feminists have pointed out potential
sexist elements in moral development theories devised by
male researchers using male subjects only (such as
Kohlberg’s early work). Because women’s experience in
the world is different from men’s (in every culture), it
would stand to reason that women’s moral development
might differ from men’s, perhaps in significant ways.

There are several approaches to the study of moral
development, which are categorized in a variety of ways.
Briefly, the social learning theory approach claims that
humans develop morality by learning the rules of acceptable behavior from their external environment (an es-

Definitions of what is or is not moral are currently
in a state of upheaval within individual societies as well
as, at least, in the Western world. Controversies rage
over the morality of warfare (especially nuclear), ecological conservation, genetic research and manipulation, al-

436

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Therefore, the study of moral development is lively
today. The rise in crime, drug and alcohol abuse, gang violence, teen parenthood, and suicide in recent years in
Western society has also caused a rise in concern over
morality and moral development. Parents and teachers
want to know how to raise moral children, and they turn to
moral development theorists to find the answers. Freudian
personality theories became more widely known to the
Western public in the 1960s and were understood to imply
that repression of a child’s natural drives would lead to
neuroses. Many parents and teachers were therefore afraid
to discipline their children, and permissiveness became
the rule. Cognitive development theories did little to
change things, as they focus on reasoning and disregard
behavior. (After a great deal of criticism in this regard,
Kohlberg and other cognitive development theorists did
begin to include moral actions in their discussions and education programs, but their emphasis is still on reasoning
alone.) Behaviorist theories, with their complete denial of
free will in moral decision-making, are unattractive to
many and require such precise, dedicated, behavior modification techniques to succeed that few people are able to
apply them in real-life situations.
The continuing breakdown of society, however, is
beginning to persuade people that permissiveness is not
the answer and another approach must be found. Schools
are returning to”character education” programs, popular
in the 1920s and 1930s, where certain “virtues” such as
honesty, fairness, and loyalty, are taught to students
along with the regular academic subjects. Unfortunately,
there is little or no agreement as to which “virtues” are
important and what exactly each “virtue” means. For example, when a student expresses dislike of another student, is she or he practicing the virtue of “fairness” or,
rather, being insensitive to another’s feelings? If a student refuses to salute the flag, is he or she betraying the
virtue of “loyalty” or, rather, being loyal to some higher
moral precept? These complex questions plague “character education” programs today, and their effectiveness remains in dispute.
Another approach to moral education that became
popular in the 1960s and 1970s is known as “values clar-

STAGES OF
MORAL DEVELOPMENT
Childhood is often divided into five approximate
stages of moral development:
• Stage 1 = infancy—the child’s only sense of right and
wrong is what feels good or bad;
• Stage 2 = toddler years—the child learns “right” and
“wrong” from what she or he is told by others;
• Stage 3 = preschool years—the child begins to internalize family values as his or her own, and begins to
perceive the consequences of his or her behavior;
• Stage 4 = ages 7-10 years—the child begins to question the infallibility of parents, teachers, and other
adults, and develops a strong sense of “should” and
“should not”;
• Stage 5 = preteen and teenage years—peers, rather
than adults, become of ultimate importance to the
child, who begins to try on different values systems to
see which fits best; teens also become more aware of
and concerned with the larger society, and begin to
reason more abstractly about “right” and “wrong.”

ification” or “values modification.” The purpose of these
programs is to guide students to establish (or discern)
their own system of values on which to base their moral
decisions. Students are also taught that others may have
different values systems, and that they must be tolerant
of those differences. The advantages of this approach are
that it promotes self-investigation and awareness and the
development of internal moral motivations (which are
more reliable than external motivations), and prevents fanaticism, authoritarianism, and moral coercion. The disadvantage is that it encourages moral relativism, the belief that “anything goes.” Pushed to its extreme, it creates
social chaos because no one can be held to any universal
(or societal) moral standard. “Values clarification” is
generally seen today to be a valuable component of
moral education, but incomplete on its own.
Lawrence Kohlberg devised a moral education program in the 1960s based on his cognitive development
theory. Called the Just Community program, it utilizes
age-appropriate (or stage-appropriate) discussions of
moral dilemmas, democratic rule-making, and the creation of a community context where students and teachers can act on their moral decisions. Just Community programs have been established in schools, prisons, and
other institutions with a fair amount of success. Exposure
to moral questions and the opportunity to practice moral

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

437

Moral development

ternative fertility and childbearing methods, abortion,
sexuality, pornography, drug use, euthanasia, racism,
sexism, and human rights issues, among others. Determining the limits of moral behavior becomes increasingly difficult as human capabilities, choices, and responsibilities proliferate with advances in technology and scientific knowledge. For example, prenatal testing techniques that determine birth defects in utero force parents
to make new moral choices about whether to birth a
child. Other examples of recently created moral questions abound in modern-day society.

Moral development

behavior in a supportive community appear to foster
deeper moral reasoning and more constructive behavior.
Overall, democratic family and school systems are
much more likely to promote the development of internal
self-controls and moral growth than are authoritarian or
permissive systems. Permissive systems fail to instill any
controls, while authoritarian systems instill only fear of
punishment, which is not an effective deterrent unless
there is a real chance of being caught (punishment can
even become a reward for immoral behavior when it is
the only attention a person ever gets). True moral behavior involves a number of internal processes that are
best developed through warm, caring parenting with
clear and consistent expectations, emphasis on the reinforcement of positive behaviors (rather than the punishment of negative ones), modeling of moral behavior by
adults, and creation of opportunities for the child to practice moral reasoning and actions.
As previously stated, there is disagreement as to the
exact motivations involved in moral behavior. Whatever
the motivations, however, the internal processes remain
the same.
The Four Component model describes them as follows:
1) moral sensitivity = empathy (identifying with another’s experience) and cognition of the effect of various
possible actions on others;
2) moral judgment = choosing which action is the
most moral;
3) moral motivation = deciding to behave in the
moral way, as opposed to other options; and
4) implementation = carrying out the chosen moral
action.
According to personal (social) goal theory, moral
(or prosocial) behavior is motivated by the desire to satisfy a variety of personal and social goals, some of
which are self-oriented (selfish), and some of which are
other-oriented (altruistic). The four major internal motivations for moral behavior as presented by personal (social) goal theorists are: 1) empathy; 2) the belief that
people are valuable in and of themselves and therefore
should be helped; 3) the desire to fulfill moral rules; and
4) self-interest. In social domain theory, moral reasoning
is said to develop within particular social “domains”: 1)
moral (e.g., welfare, justice, rights); 2) social-conventional (social rules for the orderly function of society);
and 3) personal (pure self-interest, exempt from social or
moral rules).
Most people in fact have more than one moral
“voice” and shift among them depending on the situation. In one context, a person may respond out of empa438

thy and place care for one person over concern for social
rules. In a different context, that same person might instead insist on following social rules for the good of society, even though someone may suffer because of it.
People also show a lack of consistent morality by sometimes choosing to act in a way that they know is not
moral, while continuing to consider themselves “moral”
people. This discrepancy between moral judgment (perceiving an act as morally right or wrong) and moral
choice (deciding whether to act in the morally “right”
way) can be explained in a number of ways, any one of
which may be true in a given situation:
• weakness of will (the person is overwhelmed by desire);
• weakness of conscience (guilt feelings are not strong
enough to overcome tempation); or
• limited/flexible morality (some latitude allowed in moral
behavior while still maintaining a”moral” identity).
The Moral Balance model proposes that most humans operate out of a limited or flexible morality. Rather
than expecting moral perfection from ourselves or others, we set certain limits beyond which we cannot go.
Within those limits, however, there is some flexibility in
moral decision-making. Actions such as taking coins left
in the change-box of a public telephone may be deemed
acceptable (though not perfectly moral), while stealing
money from an open, unattended cash register is not.
Many factors are involved in the determination of moral
acceptability from situation to situation, and the limits
on moral behavior are often slippery. If given proper encouragement and the opportunity to practice a coherent
inner sense of morality, however, most people will develop a balanced morality to guide their day-to-day interactions with their world.
Dianne K. Daeg de Mott
Further Reading
Crittenden, Paul. Learning to be Moral: Philosophical
Thoughts About Moral Development. Atlantic Highlands,
NJ: Humanities Press International, 1990.
Gilligan, Carol. In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and
Women’s Development. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1982.
Kohlberg, Lawrence. Essays on Moral Development, I: The
Philosophy of Moral Development: Moral Stages and the
Idea of Justice. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1981.
———. Essays on Moral Development, II: The Psychology of
Moral Development. San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1984.
———. Child Psychology and Childhood Education: A Cognitive-Developmental View. New York: Longman, 1987.
Kurtines, William M., and Jacob L. Gewirtz, eds. Moral Development: An Introduction. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1995.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Information
Developmental Studies Center. 2000 Embarcadero, Suite 305,
Oakland, CA 94606-5300, (510) 533–0213, (800)
666–7270.
Center for the Advancement of Ethics and Character. Boston
University School of Education, 605 Commonwealth
Ave., Room 356, Boston, MA 02215, (617) 353–3262,
fax: (617) 353–3924.
Educators for Social Responsibility (ESR). 23 Garden St.,
Cambridge, MA 02138, (800) 370–2515.
The Heartwood Institute. 425 N. Craig St., Suite 302, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, (800) 432–7810.

Christiana Drummond
Morgan
1897-1967
American clinician who co-created the Thematic
Apperception Test (TAT).

Christiana Drummond Morgan grew up living the
life of a debutante and may well have become no more
than a society figure. Because she came of age at a time
of social upheaval throughout the world, and because her
life crossed paths with many influential scientists and intellectuals, she was able to expand her talents and make
important contributions to behavioral therapy. Her unorthodox romance with the behaviorist Henry Murray
no doubt opened many doors for her, and she served as
an inspiration for much of Murray’s work as well. Yet
the affair also kept her, in large part, in Murray’s shadow.
Combined with often precarious health, as well as the
skepticism male psychologists harbored toward female
psychologists, it is not merely a platitude to say that she
possessed a store of untapped potential.
Born in Boston on October 6, 1897, Morgan was the
second of three daughters of William and Isabella
Coolidge Councilman. William Councilman was a
physician who served as a professor at Harvard Medical
School. Young Christiana and her sisters were raised like
many well-to-do girls and attended private schools. In
1917 she met William Morgan, a Harvard student; they
became engaged shortly before he went to fight in the
First World War. She went to New York, where she enrolled in a nursing program and received a nurse’s aide

certificate. When the war ended, William Morgan returned, and the two were married in 1919. A year later
Christiana Morgan gave birth to a son, Thomas.

Embarks on research career
The family moved to New York, where Morgan
studied at the Art Students League from 1921 to 1924.
Around this time the Morgans became increasingly close
to Henry Murray and his wife. Henry Murray and Christiana Morgan were quickly drawn to each other but were
reluctant to begin an affair. Both allowed themselves to
be analyzed in Switzerland by the psychiatrist and former Freud disciple Carl Jung, who encouraged the affair as a way for both to unlock their unconscious. Although both Morgan and Murray remained married to
their respective spouses, (her husband died in 1934;
Murray’s wife in 1964), the two were together until Morgan’s death. In the 1930s Murray and Morgan were part
of the group that created the Harvard Psychological
Clinic; later, Morgan was named a Radcliffe Research
Fellow, a title she held for the rest of her career.

Co-creates Thematic Apperception Test
Morgan’s analysis with Jung led to a series of “visions” experienced in a semi-hypnotic state. Jung encouraged her to draw these visions, which he used in his
ongoing research into the unconscious mind. Morgan’s
visions eventually became less psychologically provocative to Jung, but her experience set the stage for what she
and Murray would develop together in the 1930s in
Cambridge, Massachusetts—the Thematic Apperception Test (TAT).
The TAT was a series of pictures (the test today consists of 31 pictures), each depicting some sort of interpersonal problem between people. Subjects are asked to
create a short narrative story to go along with each picture. Different pictures can be used for men, women, and
children. The idea behind the TAT is that as a person
composes a story to accompany each picture, he or she
will unconsciously reveal information that would not
otherwise be shared. Based on this information, a trained
psychologist can determine some of the dynamics of the
individual’s personality. Morgan and Murray first published their description of TAT in 1935. Initially, the TAT
was known as the Morgan-Murray Thematic Apperception Test. Later, Murray was given primary credit for the
test, along with “the staff of the Harvard Psychological
Clinic.” Why Morgan’s credit was downplayed has been
the source of speculation, but apparently she did not
question this move.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

439

Christiana Drummond Morgan

Power, F. C., Ann Higgins, and Lawrence Kohlberg. Lawrence
Kohlberg’s Approach to Moral Education: A Study of
Three Democratic High Schools. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1989.
Schulman, Michael, and Eva Mekler. Bringing Up a Moral
Child: A New Approach for Teaching Your Child to Be
Kind, Just, and Responsible, rev. ed. New York: Main
Street Books/Doubleday, 1994.

Motivation

For the next three decades, Morgan continued her
work at Harvard, although she was plagued by a number
of health problems. Her blood pressure was so dangerously high that she was obliged to undergo an operation
called a radical sympathectomy, which severs the body’s
sympathetic nervous system from the spinal cord. (This
operation, which can have severe side effects, is no longer
performed today.) In later years, she succumbed to alcoholism. All the while her stormy relationship with Murray continued. By now Murray was recognized as an important figure in behavioral psychology. His interest in
her seemed to wax and wane—and even though she was
aware of what was happening, her emotional attachment
was too strong for her to break off the relationship. In the
mid-1960s Murray became infatuated with a younger
woman, although he did not break off his relationship
with Morgan. The strain appeared to be too much for
Morgan, now 69. On March 14, 1967, during a trip with
Murray to the Virgin islands, Morgan drowned herself.
George A. Milite
Further Reading
Douglas, Claire. Translate This Darkness: The Life of Christiana Morgan. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1993.

Motivation
The drive that produces goal-directed behavior.

The study of motivation is concerned with the influences that govern the initiation, direction, intensity, and
persistence of behavior. Three categories of motives have
been recognized by many researchers: primary or biological (hunger and the regulation of food intake); stimulus-seeking (internal needs for cognitive, physical, and
emotional stimulation, or intrinsic and extrinsic rewards); and learned (motives acquired through reward
and punishment, or by observation of others).
Instinct theories, which were popular early in the
twentieth century, take a biological approach to motivation. Ethologists study instinctual animal behavior to
find patterns that are unlearned, uniform in expression,
and universal in a species. Similarly, instinct theory in
humans emphasizes the inborn, automatic, involuntary,
and unlearned processes which control and direct human
behavior. Scientific development of the instinct theory
consisted largely of drawing up lists of instincts. In
1908, William McDougall (1871-1938) postulated 18
human instincts; within 20 years, the list of instincts had
grown to 10,000. Although instinct theory has since been
440

abandoned, its evolutionary perspective has been adopted by sociobiologists considering a wide range of human
behavior, from aggression to interpersonal attraction,
from the standpoint of natural selection and the survival
of humans as a species.
Drive-reduction theory, which is biologically-oriented but also encompasses learning, centers on the
concept of homeostasis, or equilibrium. According to
this theory, humans are constantly striving to maintain
homeostasis by adjusting themselves to change. Any
imbalance creates a need and a resulting drive—a state
of arousal that prompts action to restore the sense of
balance and thereby reduce the drive. The drive called
thirst, for example, prompts us to drink, after which the
thirst is reduced. In drive-reduction theory, motivation
is seen not just as a result of biological instincts, but
rather as a combination of learning and biology. The
primary drives, such as hunger and thirst, are basic
physiological needs that are unlearned. However, there
is also a system of learned drives known as secondarydrives that are not biological (such as the desire for
money) but that prompt action in much the same way as
the primary drives.
Another biologically-oriented theory of motivation
is arousal theory, which posits that each person is driven
to achieve his or her optimum level of arousal, acting in
ways that will increase this level when it is too low and
decrease it when it is too high. Peak performance of
tasks is usually associated with moderate levels of
arousal. Researchers have found that difficult tasks (at
which people might “freeze” from nervousness) are best
accomplished at moderate arousal levels, while easier
ones can be successfully completed at higher levels.
Psychologically-oriented theories of motivation emphasize external environmental factors and the role of
thoughts and expectations in motivation. Incentive theory argues that motivation results from environmental
stimuli in the form of positive and negative incentives,
and the value these incentives hold at a given time. Food,
for example, would be a stronger incentive when a person is hungry. Cognitive theories emphasize the importance of mental processes in goal-directed behavior.
Many theorists have agreed, for example, that people are
more strongly motivated when they project a positive
outcome to their actions. Achievement-oriented individuals learn at an early age to strive for excellence, maintain optimistic expectations, and to not be readily discouraged by failure. Conversely, individuals who consistently fear failure have been found to set goals that are
too high or too low and become easily discouraged by
obstacles. The concept of learned helplessness centers
on how behavior is affected by the degree of control that
is possible in a given situation.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Henry Alaxander Murray Jr.

American psychologist Abraham Maslow developed a five-level hierarchy of needs, or motives, that influence human behavior. The “lower” physiological and
biological urges at the bottom of the hierarchy must be at
least partially satisfied before people will be motivated
by those urges closer to the top. The levels in Maslow’s
system are as follows: 1) biological (food, water, oxygen, sleep); 2) safety ; 3) belongingness and love (participating in affectionate sexual and non-sexual relationships, belonging to social groups); 4) esteem (being respected as an individual); and 5) self-actualization(becoming all that one is capable of being).
In addition to individual motivations themselves,
conflicts between different motivations exert a strong influence on human behavior. Four basic types of conflict
have been identified: 1) approach-approach conflicts, in
which a person must choose between two desirable activities that cannot both be pursued; 2) avoidance-avoidance conflicts, in which neither choice in a situation is
considered acceptable and one must choose the lesser of
two evils; 3) approach-avoidance conflicts, where one
event or activity has both positive and negative features;
and 4) multiple approach-avoidance conflicts involving
two or more alternatives, all of which have both positive
and negative features.
See also Cognitive development; Environment;
Ethology
Further Reading
Hoffman, Edward. The Right to be Human: A Biography of
Abraham Maslow. Los Angeles: Tarcher, 1988.

Multiple personality
See Dissociative identity disorder

Henry Alexander Murray Jr.
1893-1988
American biochemist, physician, and clinical and
experimental psychologist who developed an integrated theory of personality.

Henry Alexander Murray, Jr. developed “personology,” the integrated study of the individual from physiological, psychoanalytical, and social viewpoints. His
background in medicine, biology, Freudian and Jungian
psychoanalysis, and clinical and experimental psychology, as well as his work in anthropology, sociology, and

Henry Murray (Archives of the History of American Psychology.
Reproduced with permission.)

literature, enabled him to develop an interdisciplinary
approach to psychology. His concepts of motivation,
particularly the need to achieve, had a major influence
on theories of psychology. In 1961, Murray earned the
Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award of the
American Psychological Association, followed by the
Gold Medal Award of the American Psychological Foundation in 1969.
Murray, born in New York City in 1893, was the
second of three children of Henry Alexander Murray, Sr.,
and Fannie Morris Babcock. His father was a poor Scottish immigrant who became a wealthy investor. His
mother, a New York socialite, was the daughter of the
founder of the Guaranty Trust Company. Murray was educated at the Craegie School and, later, at Groton Academy. He entered Harvard University in 1911.

Becomes a physician and researcher
Although Murray’s Harvard major was history, he
entered the Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons in New York in 1915, earning his M.D. in 1919. In
1916, he married Josephine Rantoul, the daughter of a
prominent Boston family and herself a graduate of Radcliffe College. The Murrays had one daughter.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

441

Henry Alexander Murray Jr.

At Columbia, George Draper stimulated Murray’s
interests in psychological factors affecting illness, and he
stayed on at Columbia to earn an M.A. in biology in
1920. Returning to Harvard, Murray went to work with
L.J. Henderson, applying the Henderson-Hasselbach
equation to the acidity of the blood. Between 1919 and
1923, Murray published 10 papers on his physiological
research.
Following two years as a surgical intern at Presbyterian Hospital in New York, Murray was awarded a research fellowship at the Rockefeller Institute for Medical
Research in New York. He studied the development of
chicken embryos, publishing 10 papers in that field,
while simultaneously working towards his Ph.D. in biochemistry from Cambridge University in England.

Discovers psychoanalysis and “depth
psychology”
In 1925, Murray first met the Swiss psychiatrist
Carl Jung, and the two became lifelong friends. With
his discovery of the writings of Herman Melville, the author of Moby Dick, Murray began to develop his theory
of personality, using Melville as a case study. Although
never published, Murray’s biography of Melville had a
major influence on the scholarship of the day, and Murray’s published articles and book chapters introduced the
application of Jung’s “depth psychology” to literary criticism. At about this time, Murray began his relationship
with Christiana Morgan, who remained his lover and
coworker until her suicide in 1967.
After earning his Ph.D. in 1927, Murray became an
instructor at Harvard under Morton Prince, a psychopathologist who had founded the Harvard Psychological Clinic. Following Prince’s death in 1929, Murray became director of the clinic, despite the fact that he had
never taken a psychology course. Together with the neuropsychiatrist Stanley Cobb, Murray moved the focus of
the clinic from experimental research in hypnosis and
multiple personality to Freudian and Jungian psychoanalysis. He also introduced these subjects into the Harvard curriculum. Murray pursued his study of personality or “personology.” At a time when American experimental psychologists studied rat behavior, Murray and
his interdisciplinary research team studied single individuals on a variety of levels. With his staff, Murray published Explorations in Personality: A Clinical Study of
Fifty Men of College Age in 1938. For decades, this remained the principle text for personality theory. With
Morgan, Murray developed the Thematic Apperception
Test, in which the subject is asked to tell stories about a
series of pictures. This test remains an important tool in
clinical psychology. Murray became an assistant profes442

sor at Harvard in 1929, associate professor in 1937, and
professor of clinical psychology in 1948.
Murray served in the Army from 1943 until 1948,
selecting personnel for the Office of Strategic Services
(which later became the Central Intelligence Agency)
and training agents in the United States and abroad. He
was awarded the Legion of Merit by the War Department
in 1946.

Further develops his theory of “personology”
After his discharge from the Army as a lieutenant
colonel, Murray joined Gordon Allport in the new Department of Social Relations at Harvard. There his research interests broadened further. With Clyde Kluckhohn, he began studying personality in society and investigated personality from the viewpoint of the dyadic interaction—the idea that a relationship between two
people could be viewed as a single system with equal
input from both partners. He also studied the role of
mythology in personality and in society. Murray was
best known, however, for his development of a human
motivational system of social needs. He described behavior as a function of the interaction of individual
needs, such as a need for achievement or a need for affiliation, and the “press” of the environment.
Interestingly, Ted Kaczynski, the serial bomber who
killed and injured several people with mail bombs, was a
participant in one of Murray’s psychological experiments when he was a Harvard undergraduate. The study
had to do with identifying men who would not break
under pressure.
Murray held numerous honorary doctorates and was
a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He retired in 1962 as a professor emeritus, the
same year that his wife died. In 1969 he married Caroline Chandler Fish and became step-father to her five
children. Murray died in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in
1988, at the age of 95. In his memory, Radcliffe College
established the Henry A. Murray Research Center for the
Study of Lives.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Douglas, Claire. Translate This Darkness: The Life of Christiana Morgan, the Veiled Woman in Jung’s Circle. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997.
Nordby, Vernon J. and Calvin S. Hall. A Guide to Psychologists and Their Concepts. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman
and Company, 1974.
Robinson, Forrest G. Love’s Story Told: A Life of Henry A.
Murray. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Music therapy
A technique of complementary medicine that uses
music prescribed in a skilled manner by trained
therapists.

General effects of music therapy
Music has been used throughout human history to
express and affect human emotion. The health benefits
of music to patients in Veterans Administration hospitals
following World War II became apparent, leading to its
use as a complementary healing practice. Musicians
were hired to work in hospitals. Degrees in music therapy became available in the late 1940s, and in 1950, the
first professional association of music therapists was
formed in the United States. The National Association of
Music Therapy merged with the American Association
of Music Therapy in 1998 to become the American
Music Therapy Association.
Music can be beneficial for anyone. Although it can
be used therapeutically for people who have physical,
emotional, social, or cognitive deficits, even those who
are healthy can use music to relax, reduce stress, improve
mood, or to accompany exercise. There are no potentially
harmful or toxic effects. Music therapists help their patients achieve a number of goals through music, including
improvement of communication, academic strengths, attention span, and motor skills. They may also assist with
behavioral therapy and pain management.
Depending on the type and style of sound, music
can either sharpen mental acuity or assist in relaxation.
Memory and learning can be enhanced, and this used
with good results in children with learning disabilities.
This effect may also be partially due to increased concentration that many people have while listening to
music. Better productivity is another outcome of an improved ability to concentrate. The term “Mozart effect”
was coined after a study showed that college students
performed better on math problems when listening to
classical music.

How music therapy is used
Music is used to form a relationship with the patient.
The music therapist sets goals on an individual basis, depending on the reasons for treatment, and selects specific
activities and exercises to help the patient progress. Ob-

jectives may include development of communication,
cognitive, motor, emotional, and social skills. Some of
the techniques used to achieve this are singing, listening,
instrumental music, composition, creative movement,
guided imagery, and other methods as appropriate. Other
disciplines may be integrated as well, such as dance, art,
and psychology. Patients may develop musical abilities as
a result of therapy, but this is not a major concern. The
primary aim is to improve the patient’s ability to function.
Learning to play an instrument is an excellent musical activity to develop motor skills in individuals with
developmental delays, brain injuries, or other motor impairment. It is also an exercise in impulse control and
group cooperation. Creative movement is another activity that can help to improve coordination, as well as
strength, balance, and gait. Improvisation facilitates the
nonverbal expression of emotion. It encourages socialization and communication about feelings as well.
Singing develops articulation, rhythm, and breath control. Remembering lyrics and melody is an exercise in
sequencing for stroke victims and others who may be intellectually impaired. Composition of words and music
is one avenue available to assist the patient in working
through fears and negative feelings. Listening is an excellent way to practice attending and remembering. It
may also make the patient aware of memories and emotions that need to be acknowledged and perhaps talked
about. Singing and discussion is a similar method, which
is used with some patient populations to encourage dialogue. Guided Imagery and Music (GIM) is a very popular technique developed by music therapist Helen Bonny.
Listening to music is used as a path to invoke emotions,
pictures, and symbols from the patient. This is a bridge
to the exploration and expression of feelings.
Music therapy is particularly effective with children.
The sensory stimulation and playful nature of music can
help to develop a child’s ability to express emotion, communicate, and develop rhythmic movement. There is also
some evidence to show that speech and language skills
can be improved through the stimulation of both hemispheres of the brain. Just as with adults, appropriately selected music can decrease stress, anxiety, and pain.
Music therapy in a hospital environment with those who
are sick, preparing for surgery, or recovering postoperatively is appropriate and beneficial. Children can also experience improved self-esteem through musical activities that allow them to succeed.
The geriatric population can be particularly prone to
anxiety and depression, particularly in nursing home
residents. Chronic diseases causing pain are also not uncommon in this setting. Music is an excellent outlet to
provide enjoyment, relaxation, relief from pain, and an
opportunity to socialize and reminisce about music that

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

443

Music therapy

Schneidman, Edwin S., ed. Endeavors in Psychology: Selections from the Personology of Henry A. Murray. New
York: Harper & Row, 1981.

Myers-Briggs Indicator

has had special importance to the individual. It can have
a striking effect on patients with Alzheimer’s disease,
even sometimes allowing them to focus and become responsive for a time. Music has also been observed to decrease the agitation that is so common with this disease.
One study shows that elderly people who play a musical
instrument are more physically and emotionally fit as
they age than their nonmusical peers.
Music can be an effective tool for the mentally or
emotionally ill. Autism is one disorder that has been particularly researched. Music therapy has enabled some
autistic children to relate to others and have improved
learning skills. Substance abuse, schizophrenia, paranoia, and disorders of personality, anxiety, and affect
are all conditions that may be benefited by music therapy. In these groups, participation and social interaction
are promoted through music. Reality orientation is improved. Patients are helped to develop coping skills, reduce stress, and express their feelings.
Pain, anxiety, and depression are major concerns
with patients who are terminally ill. Music can provide
some relief from pain, through release of endorphins and
promotion of relaxation. It can also provide an opportunity for the patient to reminisce and talk about the fears that
are associated with death and dying. Music may help regulate the rapid breathing of a patient who is anxious, and
soothe the mind. The Chalice of Repose project, headquartered at St. Patrick Hospital in Missoula, Montana, is
one organization that attends and nurtures dying patients
through the use of music, in a practice they called musicthanatology by developer Therese Schroeder-Sheker.
Practitioners in this program work to relieve suffering
through music prescribed for the individual patient.
Judith Turner
Further Reading
Campbell, Don. The Mozart Effect Avon Books, 1997
Cassileth, Barrie. The Alternative Medicine Handbook W. W.
Norton & Co., Inc., 1998
Woodham, Anne and David Peters. Encyclopedia of Healing
Therapies DK Publishing, Inc., 1997

Further Information
American Music Therapy Association, Inc. 8455 Colesville
Road, Suite 1000, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA. 20910,
(301) 589-3300. http://www.musictherapy.org/.

Myers-Briggs Type Indicator
A personality test that categorizes people according
to stated preferences in thinking and perceiving.
444

The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) assigns
people to one of sixteen different categories or types,
based on their answers to 126 questions, such as: “How
easy or difficult do you find it to present yourself, consistently, over a long period as a person who is patient?”
There are 4 different subscales of the test, which purport
to measure different personality tendencies. Extraversion-introversion (E-I) distinguishes between people
who are sociable and outgoing, versus those who are
more inward looking. Sensing-intuition (S-I) sorts people according to their attention to practical realities as
opposed to relying on their imagination. Thinking-feeling (T-F) shows the difference between relying on logic
versus intuition when making decisions. Finally, judging-perceiving (J-P) refers to one’s tendency to analyze
and categorize one’s experiences, as opposed to responding spontaneously. Sixteen different types emerge from
the combination of the above four pairs of traits.
The MBTI is probably the most popular self-insight
psychological test in use today, with at least a million
people per year completing it. It is widely used in business, industry, educational settings, and government because of its assumed ability to capture people’s interests,
needs, and values. MBTI profiles are often used in career
counseling or as a basis for matching work partners or for
selecting tasks that are best suited for one’s MBTI type.
With any psychological test, its utility is dependent
on its reliability and validity. A reliable test is one that
produces consistent results over time. For example, IQ
tests have high reliability, inasmuch as your IQ as measured today will not be appreciably different a year from
now. The MBTI’s reliability is only fair. One study
showed that fewer than half of the respondents retained
their initial types over a 5-week period. Consequently,
we should be careful about making career decisions
based on a classification system that is unstable. People
change over time as a result of experience. The MBTI
may capture a person’s current state, but that state should
probably not be treated as a fixed typology. Does the
MBTI assist in career counseling? Is the test diagnostic
of successful performance in particular occupations?
These questions pertain to validity—the ability of the
test to predict future performance. There have been no
long-term studies showing that successful or unsuccessful careers can be predicted from MBTI profiles. Nor is
there any evidence that on-the-job performance is related
to MBTI scores. Thus, there is a discrepancy between
the MBTI’s popularity and its proven scientific worth.
From the point of view of the test-taker, the MBTI provides positive feedback in the form of unique attributes
that are both vague and complimentary, and thus could
appeal to large numbers of people. It is possible that the
MBTI could be useful as a vehicle for guiding discus-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Pittenger, D. “The utility of the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator.”
Review of Educational Research, 63, (1993) 467-488.

Timothy Moore

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

445

Myers-Briggs Indicator

sions about work-related problems, but its utility for career counseling has not been established.

N
Narcissism
Excessive preoccupation with self and lack of empathy for others.

Narcissism is the personality trait that features an
exaggerated sense of the person’s own importance and
abilities. People with this trait believe themselves to be
uniquely gifted and commonly engage in fantasies of
fabulous success, power, or fame. Arrogant and egotistical, narcissistics are often snobs, defining themselves
by their ability to associate with (or purchase the services of) the “best” people. They expect special treatment and concessions from others. Paradoxically, these
individuals are generally insecure and have low self-esteem. They require considerable admiration from others
and find it difficult to cope with criticism. Adversity or
criticism may cause the narcissistic person to either
counterattack in anger or withdraw socially. Because
narcissistic individuals cannot cope with setbacks or
failure, they often avoid risks and situations in which
defeat is a possibility.
Another common characteristic of narcissistic individuals is envy and the expectation that others are envious as well. The self-aggrandizement and self-absorption
of narcissistic individuals is accompanied by a pronounced lack of interest in and empathy for others. They
expect people to be devoted to them but have no impulse
to reciprocate, being unable to identify with the feelings
of others or anticipate their needs. Narcissistic people
often enter into relationships based on what other people
can do for them.
During adolescence, when the individual is making
the transition from childhood to adulthood, many
demonstrate aspects of narcissism. These traits, related
to the adolescent’s need to develop his or her own sense
of self, do not necessarily develop into the disorder that
psychologists have studied for decades, known as narcissistic personality disorder. In 1898, Havelock Ellis
446

(1859-1939) was the first psychologist to address narcissism in a published work. Sigmund Freud claimed that
sexual perversion is linked to the narcissistic substitution
of the self for one’s mother as the primary love object in
infancy. In 1933, psychoanalyst Wilhelm Reich (18971957) described the “phallic-narcissistic” personality
type in terms that foreshadow the present-day definition:
self-assured, arrogant, and disdainful. In 1969, Theodore
Milton specified five criteria for narcissistic personality
disorder in the third edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-III): (1) inflated
self-image; (2) exploitative; (3) cognitive expansiveness;
(4) insouciant temperament; and (5) deficient social
conscience.
The person with narcissistic personality disorder
experiences a powerful need to be admired and seems
consumed with his or her own interests and feelings.
Individuals with this disorder have little or no empathy
for others and an inflated sense of their own importance
and of the significance of their achievements. It is common for persons with this disorder to compare themselves to famous people of achievement and to express
surprise when others do not share or voice the same
perception. They feel entitled to great praise, attention,
and deferential treatment by others, and have difficulty
understanding or acknowledging the needs of others.
They envy others and imagine that others are envious of
them. The person with narcissistic personality disorder
has no patience with others, and quickly strays from
situations where he or she is not the center of attention
and conversation. According to DSM-IV, narcissistic
personality disorder affects less than 1% of the general
population. Of those, between half and three-fourths
are male.
Secondary features of narcissistic personality disorder include feelings of shame or humiliation,
depression, and mania. Narcissistic personality disorder
has also been linked to anorexia nervosa, substance-related disorders (especially cocaine abuse), and other personality disorders.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Masterson, James F. The Emerging Self: A Developmental,
Self, and Object Relations Approach to the Treatment of
the Closet Narcissistic Disorder. New York:
Brunner/Mazel, 1993.
Sandler, Joseph, Ethel Spector Person, and Peter Fonagy, eds.
Freud’s “On Narcissism—an Introduction.” New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 1991.
Westen, Drew. Self and Society: Narcissism, Collectivism, and
the Development of Morals. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1985.

Narcolepsy
A sleep disorder whose primary symptom is irresistible attacks of sleepiness during the daytime.

Narcolepsy, which usually begins in adolescence or
early adulthood, affects about one in every 1,000 persons
and is equally common in males and females. The sleep
attacks, which can occur anywhere from six to 20 times
a day, usually last about 10 to 20 minutes but can persist
for as long as two to three hours. Narcolepsy is diagnosed if sleep attacks occur every day for at least three
months (although most people treated for the disorder
suffer from it for a much longer period of time—often
years—before seeking help). In addition to the sleep attacks, persons suffering from narcolepsy often display
several other characteristic symptoms. The most debilitating of these is cataplexy, a sudden loss of muscle tone
that can affect a part or all of the body. Cataplectic attacks range from a sagging jaw or drooping head to a
total collapse that causes the person to fall to the ground.
Affecting about 70% of narcoleptics, they are usually
triggered by strong emotions, ranging from fear and
anger to excitement and amusement (laughter often provokes cataplectic attacks). Respiration is not affected,
and full consciousness is maintained throughout the
episode. Usually the attacks only last a few seconds,
after which normal muscle strength returns. Other symptoms of narcolepsy include vivid dreamlike imagery
while waking or falling asleep, episodes of sleep paralysis (in which the person wakes but is temporarily unable
to move), and automatic behavior (sleepwalking-type actions which are performed without the person’s conscious knowledge).

ponent to narcolepsy: having a narcoleptic parent dramatically increases one’s chances of developing the disorder, from the normal 1 in 1,000 to 1 in 20. In recent research, a genetic marker has been found in the blood of
over 95% of narcolepsy sufferers who were tested for it.
Narcolepsy may also develop as a consequence of brain
damage caused by injury or disease.
Narcolepsy is a chronic illness that lasts throughout
a person’s lifetime and has no known cure. Napping during the daytime can reduce the number of sleep attacks
by lessening sleepiness. For those severely affected by
the disorder, stimulants such as methylphenidate (Ritalin) and Dexedrine have been prescribed to ward off sleep
attacks. Cataplexy—thought to be a partial intrusion of
REM sleep into the waking state—has been treated with
medications known to suppress REM sleep, such as tricyclic antidepressants. Doctors have had good results
with another medication, the experimental drug gammahydroxybutyrate, prescribed for narcoleptics to improve
the quality of their nighttime sleep, which is usually fitful and fragmented. The resulting improvement of nighttime sleep has had marked success in the reduction (and
in some cases complete remission) of symptoms, including both daytime sleep attacks and cataplexy. To avoid
the potential danger and embarrassment of cataleptic
episodes, some persons with narcolepsy try to control
the emotions that trigger them, even avoiding situations
that are likely to bring on these emotions.
Narcolepsy has a crippling effect on the lives of
those afflicted with it, causing disruption, embarrassment, and, potentially, danger in their everyday lives and
interfering with both work and family life. Self-help
groups sponsored by the American Narcolepsy Association (and a similar group in Canada) offer support to narcoleptics and their families. These organizations also
work to help raise public awareness about the disorder.
Further Reading
Dement, William C. The Sleepwatchers. Stanford: Stanford
Alumni Association, 1992.
Dotto, Lydia. Losing Sleep: How Your Sleeping Habits Affect
Your Life. New York: William Morrow, 1990.
Ince, Susan. Sleep Disturbances. Boston: Harvard Medical
School, Health Publications Groups, 1995.

Further Information
American Narcolepsy Association. 425 California Street, Suite
201, San Francisco, CA 94104, (415) 788–4793.

The cause of narcolepsy is not known, but sleep researchers believe it comes from a malfunction of the
mechanism in the brain that regulates sleeping and waking, especially the regulation of REM (rapid eye movement) sleep, the part of the sleep cycle associated with
dreaming. It is also known that there is a hereditary comGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Narcotic drugs
A category of addictive drugs that reduce the perception of pain and induce euphoria.
447

Narcotic drugs

Further Reading

National Association of School Psychologists

A narcotic is a depressant that produces a stuporous
state in the person who takes it. Narcotics, while often
inducing a state of euphoria or feeling of extreme well
being, are powerfully addictive. The body quickly builds
a tolerance to narcotics, so that greater doses are required to achieve the same effect. Because of their addictive qualities, most countries have strict laws regarding
the production and distribution of narcotics.
Historically, the term narcotic was used to refer to
the drugs known as opiates. Opium, morphine, codeine,
and heroin are the most important opiate alkaloids—
compounds extracted from the milky latex contained in
the unripe seedpods of the opium poppy. Opium, the
first of the opiates to be widely used, was a common
folk medicine for centuries, often leading to addiction
for the user. The invention of the hypodermic needle
during the mid-19th century allowed opiates to be delivered directly into the blood stream, thereby dramatically increasing their effect. By the late 20th century,
the legal definition of a narcotic drug had been expanded to include such non-opiate addictive drugs as cocaine and cannabis.
Narcotic drugs decrease the user’s perception of pain
and alter his or her reaction to pain. For this reason, narcotics—primarily codeine and morphine—are prescribed
legitimately as pain killers. In a medical setting, they are
referred to as narcotic analgesics. For pain relief, scientists
have developed opioids, which are synthetic drugs with
morphine-like properties. Some common synthetic opioids
include meperidine (trade name Demerol) and methadone,
a drug often used to treat heroin addiction. The use of
methadone as a treatment for addiction is controversial,
however, since methadone itself is addicting.
Scientists have attempted to develop ways to use
the pain-killing properties of narcotics while counteracting their addictive qualitites. Such investigations
have led to the discovery of narcotic receptors in the
brain, and of the body’s own natural pain-killing substances, called endorphins. Narcotics behave like endorphins and act on, or bind to, the receptors to produce their associated effects. Substances known as narcotic or opioid antagonists are drugs that block the actions of narcotics and are used to reverse the side
effects of narcotic abuse or an overdose. A new class of
drugs, a mixture of opioids and opioid antagonists, has
been developed so that patients can be relieved of pain
without the addictive or other unpleasant side effects
associated with narcotics.
Narcotic drugs are among those substances used illegally, or abused, by adolescents. Some estimate that as
many as 90% of adult drug addicts began a pattern of
substance abuse during adolescence.
448

Further Reading
Sanberg, Paul R. Prescription Narcotics: The Addictive
Painkillers. New York: Chelsea House, 1986.
Traub, James. The Billion-Dollar Connection: The International Drug Trade. New York: J. Messner, 1982.
Willette, Robert E., and Gene Barnett, eds. Narcotic Antagonists: Naltrexone Pharmacochemistry and Sustained-Release Preparations. DHHS Publications No. ADM 81-102
490 1, NIDA Research Monograph No. 28. Rockville,
MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
Public Health Service, 1981.

National Association of
School Psychologists
Organization of school psychologists and related
professionals, with members in the United States
and 25 other countries.

The National Association of School Psychologists
(NASP) has over 21,000 members from the United
States and abroad. Founded in 1969, NASP is dedicated to serving the mental health and educational needs
of school age children and adolescents. Members are
school psychologists or professionals in related fields.
The association encourages professional development
and provides publications, meetings, workshops, and
seminars for its members, and maintains a resource library and a placement service for school psychologists. In addition, NASP plays an activist role on behalf of school-age children, issuing position statements
and resolutions to its membership, the general public,
and government officials at all levels on such issues as
violence in media and toys; legislative priorities; advocacy for appropriate educational services for all children; corporal punishment; and racism, prejudice,
and discrimination.
NASP operates a national certification program for
school psychologists. In addition, NASP is approved by
the American Psychological Association and the National Board of Certified Counselors to provide continuing
education for psychologists and National Certified
Counselors. This allows participants in NASP’s convention workshops and regional workshops to apply these
sessions to their state’s requirements for renewal of professional licenses.
Further Reading
National Association of School Psychologists. 4340 East-West
Highway, Suite 402, Bethesda, MD 20814-4411, (301)
657–0270. www.naspweb.org.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

A component of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services, with a mission to increase
knowledge and understanding in all aspects of
mental health, and to develop effective strategies to
promote mental health and to prevent or treat mental illness.

The National Institute of Mental Health conducts
and supports research in a very broad array of areas of
mental health and illness. The Institute also collects and
analyzes a vast amount of scientific data, widely distributes those data and analyses, and provides technical assistance to numerous federal, state, local, and private
agencies and organizations. The National Institute of
Mental Health consists of nine principal divisions and
offices, and oversees the administration of a hospital.

Natural selection
See Darwin, Charles

Nature-nurture controversy
Colloquial term for the two views of human development, one emphasizing heredity and the other
environment.

The nature-nurture controversy is an age-old dispute
among behavioral psychologists,philosophers, theologians, and theorists of consciousness as to the source of
the creation ofhuman personality: Does it develop primarily from biology (nature), or from the environments
inwhich we are raised (nurture)? People have been pondering the role of nature and environmentsince the time
of Hippocrates (c. 460-c. 377 B.C. ). He, for instance,
linked human behavior tofour bodily fluids, or humors:
yellow bile, blood, black bile, and phlegm. Hippocrates
classifiedpersonalities into four types related to these four
humors: choleric (yellow bile), or hot-tempered;sanguine
(blood), or confident; melancholic (black bile), or moody;
and phlegmatic, or slow totake action.
Unlike Hippocrates, the philosopher John Locke
(1632-1704), whose ideas were aprecursor to behaviorism, believed that behaviors were externally determined. Similarly, thephilosopher Jean-Jacques

The first scientist of the modern era to seriously
consider the genetic and environmentaleffects in personality development was Sir Francis Galton, a
wealthy British scientist. Hedabbled in the arts and sciences but became primarily interested in what we today
call geneticsafter his cousin, Charles Darwin, published The Origin of the Species in 1859. He was fascinated by the idea of genetic pre-programming andsought to uncover the ways in which humans are predestined. Many of his experiments were eccentric and illconceived, but his contributions to the field are still
considered vital. His studies, curiously, led to the development of the science of fingerprinting and to the concept of the word association test. He also coined the
term “eugenics” and believed that science would one
day be able to direct, with absolute precision, the development patterns of human evolution.Taking the other
position in this early debate was John Watson, the eminent behaviorist who once made the outlandish claim—
which he later modified—that he could turn babies into
any kind of specialist he wanted.
Over the years, much research has been done in the
nature/nurture controversy, and today nearly everyone
agrees that both nature and nurture play crucial roles in
human development.This outlook has come to be known
as interactionism and is the dominant system of belief
among biologists, psychologists, and philosophers nearly
everywhere.
Much of the research in the late 20th century has focused on twins who were separated at birth. In studying
such pairs, psychologists can be relatively certain that any
behavior the twins share has a genetic component, and
those behaviors that are different have environmental
causes.There are many famous cases of twins separated at
birth being reunited later in life to find that they have
many things in common. One of the most striking studies
of twins, reported in a 1995 New Yorker article, was conducted by Thomas Bouchard, a professor of psychology
at the University of Minnesota and founder of the Center
for Twin and Adoptive Research. The twins, Daphne
Goodship and Barbara Herbert, had been separated at
birth and sent to economically different areas of London.
The article’s author, Lawrence Wright writes, “When
they finally met, at King’s Cross Station in May of 1979,
each was wearing a beige dress and a brown velvet jacket. . . . Both had the eccentric habit of pushing up their
noses, which they called ‘squidging.’ Both had fallen

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

449

Nature-nurture controversy

National Institute of Mental
Health

Rousseau (1712–1778) theorized that people were born
essentiallygood, and that positive aspects of the environmental contribute to the development of behavior.
Locke believed that people were born essentially blank,
like a blackboard, and who they “became” was entirely
the result of their experiences.

Nature-nurture controversy

GENES AND BEHAVIOR
Is a child’s athletic ability inherited, or simply a product of training? If one parent hasschizophrenia, will his
child acquire the disease? The genetic foundations of behavior are studied by behavior genetics, an interdisciplinary science which draws on the resources of several scientific disciplines, including genetics, physiology, and
psychology. Because of the nature of heredity, behavior
geneticists are unable to assess the role played by genetic
factors in an individual’s behavior: their estimates by definition apply to groups. There are 23 pairs of chromosomes
in each human cell (a total of 46 chromosomes-each with
approximately 20,000 genes). Genes from both members
of a pair act in concert to produce a particular trait. What
makes heredity complex and extremely difficult to measure is the fact that human sperm and eggs, which are
produced by cell division,have 23 unpaired chromosomes. This means that one half of a person’s genes comes
from the mother, and the other half from the father, and
that each individual, with the exception of his orher identical twin, has a unique genetic profile.
Scientists are working on the Human Genome Project recently finished mapping anestimated 100,000
genes in the human DNA. They have been able to identify
genes responsiblefor a variety of diseases, including Huntington’s disease, Down syndrome, cystic fibrosis,TaySachs disease, and a number of cancers. Genetic information about a particular disease constitutes a crucial
milestone in the search for a cure. For example,
phenylketonuria (PKIU) is a disease caused by a recessive
gene from each parent; PKU’s genetic basis is clearly understood. A child with PKU is unable to metabolize
phenylalanine, an amino acid found in proteins. Thephenylalanine build-up afflicts the central nervous system,
causing severe brain damage. Because the genetic
processes underlying PKU are known, scientists have
been able to develop a screening test, and thus can
quickly diagnose the afflicted children shortly after birth.
When diagnosed early, PKU can be successfully controlled by diet.

hair, have a much higher heritability than behavior. In
fact, behavior genetics assumes that the genetic bases of
an individual’s behavior simply cannot be determined.
Consequently, researchers have focused their efforts on
the behavior of groups, particularly families. However,
even controlled studies of families have failed to establish
conclusive links between genetics and behavior, or between genetics and particular psychological traits and aptitudes. In theory, these links probably exist; in practice,
however, researchers have been unable to isolate traits
that are unmodified by environmental factors. For example, musical aptitude seems to recur in certainfamilies.
While it is tempting to assume that this aptitude is an inherited genetic trait, it would bea mistake to ignore the
environment. What is colloquially known as “talent” is
probably a combination of genetic and other, highly variable, factors.
More reliable information about genetics and behavior can be gleaned from twin studies.When compared to
fraternal (dizygotic) twins, identical (monozygotic) twins
display remarkable behavioral similarities. (Unlike fraternal twins, who develop from two separate eggs, identical
twins originate from a single divided fertilized egg.) However, even studies of identical twins reared in different
families are inconclusive, because, as scientists have discovered, in many cases, the different environments often
turn out to be quite comparable, thus invalidating the hypothesis that the twins’ behavioral similarities are entirely
genetically determined. Conversely,studies of identical
twins raised in the same environment have shown that
identical twins can develop markedly different personalities. Thus, while certain types of behavior can be traced
to certain genetic characteristics, there is no genetic blueprint for an individual’s personality.

While genetic research can determine the heritability of a some diseases, the genetic foundations of behavior
are much more difficult to identify. From a genetic point
of view,physical traits, such as the color of a person’s

Twin studies have also attempted to elucidate the genetic basis of intelligence, which,according to many psychologists, is not one trait, but a cluster of distinct traits.
Generally, these studies indicate that identical twins
reared in different families show a high correlation in IQ
scores. No one questions the genetic basis of intelligence, but scientists still do not know how intelligence is
inherited and what specific aspects of intelligence can be
linked to genetic factors.

down the stairs at the age of fifteen and had weak ankles
as a result. At sixteen, each had met at a local dance the
man she was going to marry. The twins suffered miscarriages with their first children, then proceeded to have
two boys followed by a girl. And both laughed more than
anyone they knew. . . . Neither had ever voted, except
once, when she was employed as a polling clerk.”

Twin researchers, buoyed by stunning accounts like
this, have been boldly asserting that nature determines
who we are to a far greater degree than nurture. But twin
research has its critics. One commonly pointed out flaw
in twin research is that twins often mythologize, i.e.,
imagine or manufacture stories about, their shared characteristics. Also in dispute is how “different” the en-

450

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Jukes family; Kallikak family
Further Reading
Bouchard, Thomas. “Genes, Personality, and Environment.”
Science (17 June 1994): 1700.
Cohen, Jack, and Ian Stewart. “Our Genes Aren’t Us.”Discover
(April 1994).
Cowley, Geoffrey. “It’s Time to Rethink Nature and Nurture.”
Newsweek (27 March 1995): 52-53.
Gallagher, Winifred. “How We Become What We Are.”
Atlantic Monthly (September 1994): 39-55.
Wright, Lawrence. “Double Mystery.” NewYorker (7 August
1995): 45-62.

Margaret Naumburg

ary and intellectual circle that included such artists Alfred Stieglitz, Van Wyck Brooks, Countee Cullen, and
Jean Toomer. The couple, who had a son, divorced in
1924, but Naumburg continued her involvement in the
artistic community. In the 1930s she began to develop
art therapy programs for psychiatric patients. Naumburg believed that art gave emotionally ill people an opportunity to express themselves and reach into their unconscious; this in turn would give therapists a better idea
of how to help them.
Naumburg continued her work with art therapy,
writing several books on her theories. She remained active in the art therapy movement in New York until she
moved to Massachusetts in 1975. She died at her home
in Needham, Massachusetts, on February 26, 1983.
George A. Milite
Further Reading
Naumburg, Margaret. Child And the World: Dialogues in Modern Education. New York, Harcourt Brace, 1928.
Naumburg, Margaret. Schizophrenic Art: Its Meaning in Psychotherapy. New York, Grune & Stratton, 1950.

1890-1983
American educator; founder of the Walden School
and pioneer in art therapy.

Margaret Naumburg was not a psychologist, but her
work as an educator and as a therapist influenced twentieth century ideas about creativity and mental illness. Her
work with children and with the mentally ill was widely
studied by psychologists and psychiatrists. She was able
to achieve all this despite her lack of training as a scientist.
Naumburg was born in New York on May 14, 1890.
She attended Barnard College (graduating in 1911) and
continued with graduate studies at Columbia University.
Later, she studied in Europe; while in Rome, she studied
briefly with the educational innovator Maria Montessori. Part of Montessori’s educational philosophy was
that children learn more effectively when they are allowed to explore ideas on their own rather than have information merely fed to them.
Naumburg, impressed by Montessori’s theories, returned to the United States and in 1915 opened the
Walden School in New York City. The school began with
two teachers and 10 students, and the educational focus
was on letting children develop their own ideas and interests. In this way, believed Naumburg, children would
not merely acquire knowledge but learn how to use that
knowledge to their best advantage.
In 1916 Naumburg married the writer Waldo
Frank. Through him she became acquainted with a liter-

Near-death experience
Intense, pleasant, and sometimes profound experiences that people report when they have “come
back” from states close to death.

Tales of near-death experiences (NDEs) are not unusual. Out-of-body experiences, the sensation of moving
through a tunnel toward a light, the review of the events of
one’s life, and pleasurable glimpses of other worlds are relatively consistent features of people’s “near death” reports.
In fact, research suggests that almost one fifth of Americans
report having almost died, and a large proportion of them
have recounted experiences like the ones mentioned above.
The reported events are very vivid, seem completely real,
and can sometimes transform people’s lives. How to explain these experiences is the subject of debate. Throughout
history people have interpreted them as journeys toward the
divine. The out-of-body experience was the soul or spirit
leaving the body, the tunnel was the passageway, the life review was the time of judgement, and the light at the end of
the tunnel was heaven (or the equivalent).
It appears that, rather than any spiritual journey or
other world phenomenon, NDEs may be best understood
by examining human physiology, neurochemistry, and
psychology. At this time, there is strong research evidence
to indicate that many of the symptoms of NDEs may be

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

451

Near-death experience

vironments really are. Because adoption agencies screen
applicants, families generally have certain shared socioeconomic characteristics. In addition, little research has
beenconducted on “disconfirming evidence,” that is, to
ask the question, “Are there twins who show no remarkable similarities?” The nature-nurture controversy is far
from settled.

Necrophilia

caused by anoxia, or a lack of oxygen to the brain. In the
human visual system, for example, neurons (brain cells)
deprived of oxygen will start to fire out of control. Since
the majority of the cells in our visual cortex (the portion of
the brain where visual information is processed) respond
to stimulation in the central visual field, the result is a
white spot in the center with fewer cells firing out of control in the periphery. As oxygen deprivation continues, the
white spot grows and the sensation of moving through a
tunnel toward a white light is produced. Similarly, it is
possible that the life review process is a result of depriving
the temporal lobes of oxygen. When the temporal lobes of
the brain, an area largely involved in memory production,
are deprived of oxygen, neurotransmitters are released and
massive electrical activity ensues. In laboratory research,
when people’s temporal lobes are stimulated with electrodes, many subjects experience the reliving of memories, out of body experiences, and even the sensation of
moving through a tunnel toward a light. Oxygen deprivation can also affect the limbic system, which contains the
seat of emotions in the brain. The intensely pleasurable
feelings of love and well-being that accompany moving
toward the light may therefore be a consequence of increased activity in the limbic system.
According to some people, the similarities among
people’s accounts of NDEs provide powerful evidence
for the existence of an afterlife. These similarities however, can also be interpreted as evidence in support of the
involvement of human physiology, neurochemistry, and
psychology. The visual cortex, temporal lobes, and limbic system are structurally and functionally common to
everyone. Consequently neurological activity associated
with stress or oxygen deprivation may be similar across
many different individuals.

Negativism is a behavior characterized by the tendency to resist direction from others, and the refusal to
comply with requests. Negativism appears and wanes at
various stages of a person’s development. Active negativism, that is, behavior characterized by doing the opposite of what is being asked, is commonly encountered
with young children. For example, a parent may ask a
toddler to come away from the playground to return
home; on hearing these instructions, the toddler demonstrates active negativism by running away.
Studies have revealed that negativism develops during the first year of life, and resurfaces during toddlerhood and again during adolescence. Negativism is used
by adolescents as a way to assert their autonomy from
their parents and to control their own behavior. When
negativism does not diminish, it becomes a characteristic
of the individual’s personality. Negativism is an aspect
of one of the essential features of oppositional-defiant
disorder, characterized by a pattern of behavior that is
defiant, negativistic, and hostile toward authority figures.
Further Reading
Baker, Lynne Rudder. Explaining Attitudes: A Practical Approach to the Mind. New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1995.
Eagly, Alice Hendrickson. The Psychology of Attitudes. Fort
Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1993.
Wenar, Charles. “On Negativism.” Human Development 25,
January-February 1982, pp. 1-23.

Neocortex
Timothy Moore
Further Reading

The exterior covering of the cerebral hemispheres
of the brain.

The neocortex, the exterior covering of the cerebral
hemispheres of the brain, is approximately 2 millimeters
thick and consists of six thin layers of cells. The cortex is
convoluted, furrowed, and, if stretched out, would measure 1.5 square feet. In terms of function, the cortex is
divided into four lobes distinguished by the lateral and
central fissures: the frontal lobe; parietal lobe (which
controls sense of touch and body position); temporal
lobe (which controls speech, hearing and vision); and
occipital lobe, which also controls vision.

Blackmore, S. “Near-death experiences: In or out of the
body?” Skeptical Inquirer, 16, (1991): 34-45.

Necrophilia
See Paraphilias

See also Brain

452

Negativism

Further Reading

A tendency to resist complying with directions or
suggestions.

Hoffman, Edward. The Right to be Human: A Biography of
Abraham Maslow. Los Angeles: Tarcher, 1988.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Nervous system

Nerve
The common name for neuron, the basic fiber, or
bundles of fibers, that transmit information to and
from the muscles, glands, organs, spinal cord, and
brain.

Nerves form the network of connections that receive
signals, known as sensory input, from the environment
and within the body and transmit the body’s responses,
or instructions for action, to the muscles, organs, and
glands. The central nervous system, comprised of the
brain and spinal cord, sends information throughout the
body over the network of nerves known collectively as
the peripheral nervous system. The nerves of the peripheral nervous system are in pairs, with one usually leading to the left side and the other to the right side of the
body. There are 12 nerve pairs, called cranial nerves, that
connect directly to the brain and control such functions
as vision and hearing. Thirty-one nerve pairs are connected directly to the spinal cord, branching out to the
rest of the body.
The peripheral nervous system may be further subdivided into the autonomic nervous system, which regulates involuntary functions such as breathing, digestion,
beating of the heart, and the somatic nervous system,
which controls voluntary functions, such as walking, picking up a pencil, and reading this page. The cells of the
central nervous system do not have the ability to regenerate, and are not replaced directly if they are damaged.
See also Neuron

Nervous system
An electrochemical conducting network that transmits messages from the brain through the nerves to
locations throughout the body.

The nervous system is responsible for the perception of external and internal conditions and the body’s
response to them. It has two major divisions: the central
and peripheral nervous systems. The central nervous
system (CNS), consisting of the brain and the spinal
cord, is that part of the nervous system that is encased in
bone; the brain is located in the cranial cavity of the
skull, and the spinal cord in the spinal column, or backbone. Both are protected by cerebrospinal fluid and a series of three membranes called meninges. The CNS receives information from the skin and muscles and sends
out motor commands as well.

The nervous system in a human. (Bettmann
Archive/Newsphotos, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

The brain functions as the center of instinctive, emotional, and cognitive processes. It is composed of three
primary divisions, the forebrain, midbrain, and hindbrain, and divided into the left and right hemispheres.
The first division, the forebrain, is the largest and most
complicated of the brain structures and is responsible for
most types of complex mental activity and behavior. The
forebrain consists of two main divisions: the diencephalon and the cerebrum. The thalamus and hypothalamus make up the diencephalon. The parts of the
cerebrum—the larger part of the forebrain—include the
corpus callosum, striatum, septum, hippocampus, and
amygdala, all covered by the cerebral cortex.
The midbrain, or mesencephalon, is the small area
near the lower middle of the brain. Portions of the midbrain have been shown to control smooth and reflexive
movements and it is important in the regulation of attention, sleep, and arousal. The hindbrain (rhombencephalon), which is basically a continuation of the spinal
cord, is the part of the brain that receives incoming mes-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

453

Nervous system

sages first. Lying beneath the cerebral hemispheres, it
consists of three structures: the cerebellum, the medulla,
and the pons, which control such vital functions of the
autonomic nervous system as breathing, blood pressure, and heart rate.
The spinal cord is a long bundle of neural tissue
continuous with the brain that occupies the interior canal
of the spinal column and functions as the primary communication link between the brain and the body. It is the
origin of 31 bilateral pairs of spinal nerves which radiate
outward from the central nervous system through openings between adjacent vertebrae. The spinal cord receives signals from the peripheral senses and relays them
to the brain.
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) includes all
parts of the nervous system not covered by bone and carries out sensory and motor functions. It is composed of
12 pairs of cranial and 31 pairs of spinal nerves which
lead to the left and right sides of the body. The PNS is
divided into two subsystems: the somatic and autonomic
nervous systems. The somatic nervous system senses and
acts upon the external world. Its sensory neurons transmit signals from receptor cells located in sense organs,
such as the skin and eye, to the CNS. Motor neurons
carry outgoing messages from the CNS to neuromuscular cells ( effectors) found in muscles, joints, glands, and
organs, which facilitate action. The skeletal muscles,
which are responsible for bodily movement, are controlled by the somatic nervous system.
The autonomic nervous system (ANS) relays messages between the CNS and the heart, lungs, and other
glands and organs. These messages increase or decrease
their activity in accordance with demands placed on the
body. The ANS affects activities that are basically outside of conscious control, such as respiration and digestion. The autonomic nervous system is further subdivided into two branches. The sympathetic system speeds up
muscles and mobilizes the body for action. This is the
system responsible for the reaction to danger known as
the “fight or flight” response. In contrast, the parasympathetic system, which slows down muscles, regulates bodily functions to conserve energy. For example, it is this
system that slows heart rate and blood flow after a large
meal is eaten to conserve energy for digestion. Disorders
of the autonomic nervous system involve reactions such
as fainting, uncontrollable sweating, and sexual dysfunction.
The nervous system is composed of two types of
cells: neurons, which transmit information through electrochemical impulses, and glial cells, which hold the
neurons together and help them communicate with each
other. There are three kinds of neurons. Receptor neu454

rons register stimulation from the environment (such as
cells in the eye responding to light or skin cells responding to pressure). When they are stimulated, they send
signals to the brain, which are then converted into various types of information. Motor, or effector neurons
transmit messages from the brain and spinal cord that
provide for muscular contraction, which results in movement. Finally, interneurons transmit signals between different parts of the nervous system. Most neurons are
composed of five parts: the cell body, which contains the
nucleus; dendrites, short fibers that usually receive signals from other neurons; the axon, a long fiber leading
away from the cell body that transmits signals to other
neurons, muscles, or glands; the myelin sheath, a fatty
substance that insulates the axon; and synapses , minute
gaps through which signals are transmitted between neurons. The many axon and dendrite fibers radiating from
neurons permit each one to be in contact with many
thousands of other neurons.
Communication at the synapses between neurons relies on chemicals called neurotransmitters. More than 50
different neurotransmitters have been identified, and
more are constantly being discovered. Recently, it was
found that the gases nitric oxide and carbon monoxide
are neurotransmitters. Different transmitters predominate
in different parts of the nervous system, and a particular
neurotransmitter may perform different functions in
different locations. Researchers have proposed that almost all drugs work through interaction with neurotransmitters. Important neurotransmitters include acetylcholine (ACh), which is used by motor neurons in the
spinal cord; the catecholamines (including norepinephrine and dopamine), which are important in the arousal
of the sympathetic nervous system; serotonin, which affects body temperature, sensory perception, and the
onset of sleep; and a group of transmitters called endorphins, which are involved in the relief of pain.
Among the major functions of the central nervous
system is that of the reflex arc, which provides immediate, involuntary reaction to potentially harmful stimulireactions commonly referred to as reflexes (such as drawing one’s hand back from a hot stove). The reflex arc is a
circuit of neurons by which signals travel from a sensory
receptor to a motor neuron, rapidly turning sensory
input into action. The complexity of the nervous system
makes it a challenge to study—millions of neurons may
lie beneath a single square centimeter of brain surface,
each synapsing with as many as 600 other neurons, and
many different parts of the brain may be involved in a
single task.
Further Reading
The Mind and Beyond. Alexandria, VA: Time-Life Books, 1991.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Technical term for nerve cell.

Neurons are the basic working unit of the nervous
system, sending, receiving, and storing signals through a
unique blend of electricity and chemistry. The human
brain has more than 100 billion neurons.
Neurons that receive information and transmit it to
the spinal cord or brain are classified as afferent or sensory; those that carry information from the brain or
spinal cord to the muscles or glands are classified as efferent or motor. The third type of neuron connects the
vast network of neurons and may be referred to as interneuron,association neuron,internuncial neuron, connector neuron, and adjustor neuron.
Although neurons come in many sizes and shapes,
they all have certain features in common. Each neuron
has a cell body where the components necessary to keep
the neuron alive are centered. Additionally, each neuron
has two types of fiber. The axon is a large tentacle and is
often quite long. (For example, the axons connecting the
toes with the spinal cord are more than a meter in
length.) The function of the axon is to conduct nerve impulses to other neurons or to muscles and glands. The
signals transmitted by the axon are received by other
neurons through the second type of fiber, the dendrites.
The dendrites are usually relatively short and have many
branches to receive stimulation from other neurons. In
many cases, the axon (but not the cell body or the dendrites) has a white, fatty covering called the myelin
sheath. This covering is believed to increase the speed
with which nerve impulses are sent down the axon.
An unstimulated neuron has a negative electrical
charge. The introduction of a stimulus makes the charge a
little less negative until a critical point—the threshold—is
reached. Then the membrane surrounding the neuron
changes, opening channels briefly to allowing positively
charged sodium ions to enter the cell. Thus, the inside of
the neuron becomes positive in charge for a millisecond
(thousandth of a second) or so. This brief change in electrical charge is the nerve impulse, or spike, after which
the neuron is restored to its original resting charge.
This weak electrical impulse travels down the axon
to the synapse. The synapse or synaptic gap forms the
connection between neurons, and is actually a place
where the neurons almost touch, but are separated by a
gap no wider than a few billionths of an inch. At the
synapses, information is passed from one neuron to another by chemicals known as neurotransmitters. The
neurotransmitter then combines with specialized receptor molecules of the receiving cell.

Physiological psychologists are interested in the
involvement of the nervous system in behavior and experience. The chemistry and operation of the nervous
system is a key component in the complex human puzzle. A number of chemical substances act as neurotransmitters at synapses in the nervous system and at
the junction between nerves and muscles. These include acetylcholine, dopamine, epinephrine (adrenalin),
and neuropeptides (enkephalins, endorphins, etc.). A
decrease in acetylocholine has been noted in
Alzheimer’s disease which causes deterioration of the
thought processes; shortage of dopamine has been
linked to Parkinson’s disease, whereas elevated
dopamine has been observed in schizophrenics.
Drugs that affect behavior and experience—the psychoactive drugs —generally work on the nervous system
by influencing the flow of information across synapses.
For instance, they may interfere with one or several of the
stages in synaptic transmission, or they may have actions
like the natural neurotransmitters and excite or inhibit receiving cells. This is also true of the drugs which are used
in the treatment of certain psychological disorders.

Neurosis
A term generally used to describe a nonpsychotic
mental illness that triggers feelings of distress and
anxiety and impairs functioning.

Origins
The word neurosis means “nerve disorder,” and was
first coined in the late eighteenth century by William
Cullen, a Scottish physician. Cullen’s concept of neurosis
encompassed those nervous disorders and symptoms that
do not have a clear organic cause. Sigmund Freud later
used the term anxiety neurosis to describe mental illness
or distress with extreme anxiety as a defining feature.
There is a difference of opinion over the clinical use
of the term neurosis today. It is not generally used as a
diagnostic category by American psychologists and psychiatrists any longer, and was removed from the Ameri-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

455

Neurosis

Neuron

Neurotransmitters either excite the receiving cell
(that is, increase its tendency to fire nerve impulses) or
inhibit it (decrease its tendency to fire impulses), and
often both actions are required to accomplish the desired
response. For example, the neurons controlling the muscles that pull your arm down (the triceps) must be inhibited when you are trying to reach up to your nose (biceps
excited); if they are not, you will have difficulty bending
your arm.

Neurosis

Dendrites

Axon
collateral

Axon

Schwann cell
Cell body
(soma)
Nissl
bodies

Node of
Ranvier

Myelin sheath of
Schwann cell

Axon hillock

Nucleus
Nucleolus
Neurofibril

Mitochondrion

Axon

Cytoplasm

Nucleus of
Schwann cell
Myelin sheath
Cytoplasm
Neurolemma

Node of
Ranvier

Synapse

Axon terminal
Synaptic knob

The features of a typical neuron. (Hans & Cassidy. Gale Group. Reproduced with permission.)

456

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Categories
The neurotic disorders are distinct from psychotic
disorders in that the individual with neurotic symptoms
has a firm grip on reality, and the psychotic patient does
not. There are several major traditional categories of psychological neuroses. These include:
• Anxiety neurosis. Mental illness defined by excessive
anxiety and worry, sometimes involving panic attacks
and manifesting itself in physical symptoms such as
tremor, chest pain, sweating, and nausea.
• Depressive neurosis. A mental illness characterized by
a profound feeling of sadness or despair and a lack of
interest in things that were once pleasurable.
• Obsessive-compulsive neurosis. The persistent and distressing recurrence of intrusive thoughts or images (obsessions) and repetitive behaviors or mental acts (compulsions).
• Somatization (formerly called hysterical neurosis). The
presence of real and significant physical symptoms that
cannot be explained by a medical condition, but are instead a manifestation of anxiety or other mental distress.
• Post-traumatic stress disorder (also called war or combat neurosis). Severe stress and functional disability
caused by witnessing a traumatic event such as war
combat or any other event that involved death or serious injury.
• Compensation neurosis. Not a true neurosis, but a form
of malingering, or feigning psychological symptoms
for monetary or other personal gain.

Causes
In 1996, a specific human gene and its corresponding alleles (two components of a gene which are responsible for encoding the gene) were linked to neuroticism.
The identified gene and its allele pair help to control the
amount of serotonin (a central nervous system neurotransmitter) released into the body through the produc-

tion of a protein known as a transporter. This transporter
protein, which helps to carry the serotonin across the
synaptic space (the gap between nerve cells) to stimulate
nerve cells, also assists the cell in reabsorbing the serotonin (a process known as “reuptake”).
In the case of the “neurosis gene,” one possible
version of its corresponding alleles (called s for their
short length) was found to produce an insufficient
amount of this transporter protein, and the other
(named l for long), a significantly large amount. If the
amount of transporter protein produced is inadequate,
an excessive amount of serotonin must remain in the
synaptic gap while the protein “catches up” with reuptake, and the serotonin will continue to stimulate surrounding nerve cells, resulting in neurosis or neurotic
symptoms. A corresponding study of 500 patients
showed that patients who were assessed as having neurotic personality traits usually possessed the shorter allele pair (or a combination of one short and one long)
that produced insufficient transporter protein.
This finding is consistent with a study published the
same year that found that women in 37 different countries scored consistently higher on measurements of
neuroticism than men. The fact that such high scores
were found across a variety of socioeconomic classes
and cultures but specific to one gender seems to support
a genetic basis for the disorder. However, a 1998 study
of over 9,500 United Kingdom residents found that
those with a lower standard of living had a higher prevalence of neurotic disorders. It is possible that genetic
factors predispose an individual to anxiety and neurosis,
and outside factors such as socioeconomic status trigger
the symptoms.

Diagnosis
Patients with symptoms of mental illness should undergo a thorough physical examination and detailed patient history to rule out organic causes (such as brain
tumor or head injury). If a neurotic disorder is suspected,
a psychologist or psychiatrist will usually conduct an interview with the patient and administer clinical assessments (also called scales, inventories, or tests), to evaluate mental status. Tests which may be administered for
the diagnosis and assessment of neurosis include the
Neuroticism Extraversion and Openness (NEO-R) scale,
the Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (16PF), and
the Social Maladjustment Schedule.

Treatment
Neurosis should be treated by a counselor, therapist,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or other mental healthcare

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

457

Neurosis

can Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders in 1980 with the publication of the third edition (it last appeared as a diagnostic
category in DSM-II). Some professionals use the term to
describe anxious symptoms and associated behavior, or
to describe the range of mental illnesses outside of the
psychotic disorders (e.g., schizophrenia, delusional
disorder). Others, particularly psychoanalysts (psychiatrists who follow a psychoanalytical model of treatment,
as popularized by Freud and Carl Jung), use the term to
describe the internal process itself (called an unconscious conflict) that triggers the anxiety characteristic of
the neurosis.

Neurotransmitter

professional. Treatment for a neurotic disorder depends
on the presenting symptoms and the level of discomfort
they are causing the patient. Modes of treatment are similar to that of other mental disorders, and can include
psychotherapy, cognitive-behavioral therapy, creative
therapies (e.g., art or music therapy), psychoactive
drugs, and relaxation exercises.

ture, sensory perception, and the onset of sleep; and a
group of transmitters called endorphins, which are involved in the relief of pain. In recent years, it has been
recognized that biochemical imbalances in the brain
play an important role in mental illness. Low levels of
norepinephrine characterize some varieties of depression, for example, and an imbalance of dopamine is considered a factor in schizophrenia.

Paula Ford-Martin
Further Reading
Fenichel, Otto M. The Psychoanalytic Theory of Neurosis:
50th Anniversary Edition. New York: W.W. Norton &
Son. 1995.
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders 4th ed. Washington, DC:
American Psychiatric Press, Inc., 1994.

Further Information
Anxiety Disorders Association of America (ADAA). 11900
Parklawn Drive, Suite 100, Rockville, MD, USA. 20852,
fax: 301-231-7392, 301-231-9350. Email:
AnxDis@adaa.org. http://www.adaa.org.

Neurotransmitter
Chemical substances or molecules which aid in
message transmission between neurons.

Communication at the synapses between neurons
relies on chemicals called neurotransmitters. Secreted
from a part of one neuron (the axon) into the synaptic
gap between two others, neurotransmitters diffuse
across this space and combine with specific proteins
on the surface of the receiving cell, triggering an electrochemical response in the target cell. Afterward, neurotransmitters are either destroyed or reabsorbed back
into the neuron for storage and reuse. The release of
neurotransmitters by a neuron has three main functions: 1) exciting a second neuron, thus causing it to
depolarize; 2) inhibiting a second neuron, which prevents it from depolarizing; and 3) stimulating a muscle
fiber to contract.
More than 50 different neurotransmitters have been
identified, and more are constantly being discovered. Researchers have proposed that almost all drugs work
through interaction with neurotransmitters. Important
neurotransmitters include acetylcholine (ACh), which is
used by motor neurons in the spinal cord; the catecholamines (including norepinephrine and dopamine),
which are important in the arousal of the sympathetic
nervous system; serotonin, which affects body tempera458

Nightmares
A frightening dream that occurs during REM (rapid
eye movement) sleep.

Nightmares—frightening dreams—are experienced
by most everyone at one time or another. Nightmares are
thought to be caused by a central nervous system response, and are related to other parasomnias such as
sleepwalking.
In children, nightmares begin between the ages of
18 months and three years and increase in frequency
and intensity around the ages of four and five years.
Children this age have an exceptionally vivid fantasy
life that carries over into their sleep. Their nightmares
are typically characterized by feelings of danger and
helplessness and often involve fleeing from monsters or
wild animals. It is not unusual for a normal child this
age to have nightmares as often as once or twice a
week. The increase in nightmares among preschoolers
reflects not only their capacity for vivid fantasy but
also the fact that as they become increasingly active,
their daily lives hold more opportunities for frightening
experiences, and growing interaction with peers and
siblings produces added potential for conflict and tension. Separation anxiety and exposure to frightening
programs on television are additional sources of emotional turbulence.
The American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-IV) recognizes an anxiety disorder characterized by persistent, severe nightmares (nightmare disorder, formerly dream anxiety disorder). Generally, nightmare disorder is found only in
children who have experienced severe psychological
stress.
Adults also occasionally experience nightmares.
The average college student has between four and eight
nightmares per year, and this figure generally drops to
one or two in adults. Adults who experience excessive
nightmares may be dealing with other issues, and may
benefit from professional counseling.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Normal distribution

Night terrors
Also referred to as pavor nocturnus, a childhood
sleep disorder featuring behavior that appears to be
intense fear.

Night terrors, known medically as pavor nocturnus,
are episodes that apparently occur during the non-dreaming stages of sleep in some children. Episodes of night
terrors are most common in the preschool and early
school years. Night terrors usually occur within an hour
or two after the child has fallen asleep, and generally do
not recur with any frequency or regularity. Many children experience only one episode of night terrors, and
few experience more than three or four such episodes
over the whole course of childhood. A parent or caregiver witnessing an episode of night terrors, which usually
lasts from ten to thirty minutes, will find the behavior
unsettling. The child sits up abruptly in bed, appears to
be extremely upset, cries out or screams, breathes heavily, and perspires. He or she might also thrash about,
kicking, and his or her eyes may bulge out, seemingly in
fear of something. The child does not wake during the
episode, although his or her eyes will be open, and he or
she will be unresponsive to any offers of comfort. The
child falls back to sleep, and will have no memory of the
occurrence. Night terrors have not been shown to have
any link to personality or emotional disorders, although
they may be related to a specific feeling of fear that the
child has experienced, such as being startled by someone
leaping at him or her from behind a chair, or the sight of
someone fainting or having an accident.
Further Reading
Beaudet, Denise. Encountering the Monster: Pathways in Children’s Dreams. New York: CrossroadContinuum, 1990.
Lansky, Vicki. Getting Your Child to Sleep—and Back to Sleep:
Tips for Parents of Infants, Toddlers, and Preschoolers.
Deephaven, MN: Book Peddlers, 1991.
Thorpy, Michael. The Encyclopedia of Sleep and Sleep Disorders. New York: Facts of File, 1990.

Further Information
Association of Sleep Disorders Centers (ASDC). 602 Second
Street, SW, Rochester, MN 55902 (Professional organization of specialists in sleep disorders; publishes the journal
Sleep.)

Normal distribution
The common pattern of numbers in which the majority of the measurements tend to cluster near the
mean of distribution.

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

4

An example of the bell-shaped curve of a normal
distribution.

Psychological research involves measurement of
behavior. This measurement results in numbers that differ from one another individually but that are predictable
as a group. One of the common patterns of numbers involves most of the measurements being clustered together near the mean of the distribution, with fewer cases occurring as they deviate farther from the mean. When a
frequency distribution is drawn in pictorial form, the
resulting pattern produces the bell-shaped curve that scientists call a normal distribution.
When measurements produce a normal distribution,
certain things are predictable. First, the mean, median,
and mode are all equal. Second, a scientist can predict
how far from the mean most scores are likely to fall.
Thus, it is possible to determine which scores are more
likely to occur and the proportion of score likely to be
above or below any given score.
Many behavioral measurements result in normal distributions. For example, scores on intelligence tests are
likely to be normally distributed. The mean is about 100
and a typical person is likely to score within about 15
points of the mean, that is, between 85 and 115. If the
psychologist knows the mean and the typical deviation
from the mean (called the standard deviation), the researcher can determine what proportion of scores is likely
to fall in any given range. For instance, in the range between one standard deviation below the mean (about 85
for IQ scores) and one deviation above the mean (about

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

459

Norm

115 for IQ scores), one expects to find the scores of about
two thirds of all test takers. Further, only about two and a
half percent of test takers will score higher than two standard deviations above the mean (about 130).
Although psychologists rely on the fact that many
measurements are normally distributed, there are certain
cases where scores are unlikely to be normally distributed.
Whenever scores cannot be higher than some upper value
or smaller than some lower value, a non-normal distribution
may occur. For example, salaries are not normally distributed because there is a lower value (i.e., nobody can make
less than zero dollars), but there is no upper value. Consequently, there will be some high salaries that will not be balanced by corresponding, lower salaries. It is important to
know whether scores are normally distributed because it
makes a difference in the kind of statistical tests that are appropriate for analyzing and interpreting the numbers.
Further Reading
Berman, Simeon M. Mathematical Statistics: An Introduction
Based on the Normal Distribution. Scranton, PA: Intext
Educational Publishers, 1971.
Martin, David W. Doing Psychology Experiments. 2nd ed.
Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1985.

Norm
A measure of central tendency in statistics, describing a value’s frequency.

In testing, norms are figures describing the frequency with which particular scores appear. They provide information about whether a score is above or below average and about what percentage of the persons tested received that score. Norms may apply to tests of mental
ability or achievement, such as IQ tests or SATs. They
are also used in personality assessment to measure variables such as anxiety, introversion-extroversion, and
paranoia. The term “norm” may also refer to social
norms, unwritten social rules that define acceptable and
unacceptable behavior in a variety of situations.
See also Mean; Median; Mode

460

Normal
Represents the characteristics that are typical for—
that is, exhibited by—most members of a particular
group.

For statistical purposes, normal means whatever is
average for a given group of people (“the norm”). Therefore, the term normal does include those group members
who deviate significantly from the measures of central
tendency (the mean, the median, or the mode) of a
given distribution.
The term normal is fundamentally statistical and
quantitative. In testing and measuring, for example, normal can be defined as a central cluster of scores in relation to a larger grouping. In intelligence testing normal
is also defined by the average, or mean, which is established as an IQ score of around 100.
However, in many contexts normal is a subjective
term that is very difficult to define. In the absence of
fixed standards, normal and abnormal are often defined
in terms of each other. However, rather than a simple
pairing of opposites, they are generally thought of as
points on a continuum of social adjustment, with normal
people possessing certain positive traits to a greater degree, while abnormal people are characterized by deficiencies in these traits. Some of the traits that help define
psychological normalcy are efficient perception of reality; self-knowledge; self-control; ability to form affectionate relationships; self-esteem; and productivity. The
notion of defining normalcy in terms of social adjustment has its detractors, who argue that such a definition
places too much emphasis on conformity and too little
on such traits as individuality and creativity.
Further Reading
Martin, David W. Doing Psychology Experiments. 2nd ed.
Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1985.
Berman, Simeon M. Mathematical Statistics: An Introduction
Based on the Normal Distribution. Scranton, PA: Intext
Educational Publishers, 1971.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

O
Obesity
A condition of having an excessive accumulation
of fat in the body, resulting in a body weight that is
at least 20 percent above normal when measured
against standard tables of optimal weight ranges
according to age, sex, height, and body type.

Individuals who are 20 percent overweight are considered slightly obese. Those who are 40 percent above
standard weight are moderately obese, while those 50 percent above it are morbidly obese. Persons who exceed desired weight levels by 100 pounds (45 kg) or more are hyperobese. Obesity is a serious health problem in the United States. Studies suggests that between 10 and 20 percent
of Americans are slightly to moderately obese. Obesity
places stress on the body’s organs, and is associated with
joint problems, high blood pressure, indigestion, dizzy
spells, rashes, menstrual disorders, and premature aging.
Generally, when compared to persons of normal weight,
obese individuals suffer more severely from many diseases, including degenerative diseases of the heart and arteries, and a shorter life expectancy. Obesity can also
cause complications during childbirth and surgery.
Obesity may be familial, as the body weight of children appears to be linked to that of their parents. Children
of obese parents have been found to be 13 times more
likely than other children to be obese, suggesting a genetic predisposition to body fat accumulation. Recent animal
research suggests the existence of a “fat gene,” and the
tendency toward a body type with an unusually high
number of fat cells—termed endomorphic— appears to
be inherited. However, the generational transmission of
obesity may be as cultural as it is genetic, as early feeding
patterns may produce unhealthy eating habits.
Some cases of obesity have a purely physiological
cause, such as glandular malfunction or a disorder of the
hypothalamus. Individuals with a low production of the
hormone thyroxin tend to metabolize food slowly, which
results in excess unburned calories. When more calories

are consumed than the body can metabolize, excess calories are stored in the body as fat, or adipose tissue. Some
persons with hypoglycemia have a specific metabolic
problem with carbohydrates that can also lead to the
storage of unburned calories as fat.
In the great majority of cases, however, obesity is
caused by overeating. Overeating itself often combines
physical and psychological components. People may eat
compulsively to overcome fear or social maladjustment,
express defiance, or avoid intimate relationships. However, researchers have also suggested physical correlates
for overeating, including deficits in the neurotransmitter serotonin that increase cravings for carbohydrates,
and possibly a higher “set point” for body weight that
makes obese persons feel hungry more often than thinner
people. This raised set point could result from both genetics and early nutritional habits. Lack of exercise and
sedentary living also contribute to obesity.
The most effective treatment of obesity includes
both the reduction of surplus body fat and the elimination of causative factors, and is best accomplished under
medical supervision. An appropriate weight loss plan includes exercise (which burns calories without slowing
metabolism), reduced food intake, behavior modification to change food-related attitudes and behavior, and
psychotherapy if there are underlying psychological
causes for overeating. Other possible treatment measures
include hormone therapy, appetite-suppressant drugs,
and surgical intervention to alter satiety signals by reducing the size of the stomach and intestines.
Behavior modification has been especially successful
and widely used in the treatment of obesity. Treatment
techniques include stimulus control (removing environmental cues that play a role in inappropriate eating), eating management (slowing the pace of eating to allow satiation to catch up with it), contingency management (applying a system of positive reinforcement and punishments), and self-monitoring of daily dietary intake and
factors associated with it. Despite all of the available treatments, the difficulty of reversing obesity in adults makes

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

461

Obsessive-compulsive disorder

OBESITY IN ADOLESCENT YOUTHS (AGES 6 TO 17) IN THE UNITED STATES
Prevalence of overweight

Doubled since 1965

Number who are overweight

4.7 million

Percent who are overweight

11 percent

Related disorders

Elevated blood cholesterol; high blood pressure;
increased adult mortality

Social consequences

Excluded from peer groups, discriminated against by
adults, experience psychological stress, poor body image,
and low self-esteem.

Source: Centers for Disease Control, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

preventative treatment an important factor during childhood. Today, an increasing percentage of children in the
United States are overweight. Recent studies have shown
that metabolic rates of children are lower when they watch
television than when they are at rest. Unhealthy eating patterns and behaviors associated with obesity can be addressed by programs in nutrition, exercise, and stress management involving both children and families.

Obsessive-compulsive
disorder
Mental illness characterized by the recurrence of
intrusive, anxiety-producing thoughts (obsessions)
accompanied by repeated attempts to suppress
these thoughts through the performance of certain
irrational, often ritualistic, behaviors (compulsions).

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is classified
as a mental illness, and is characterized by the recurrence of intrusive, anxiety-producing thoughts (obsessions). The person with obsessive-compulsive disorder
repeatedly and consistently tries to suppress these
thoughts through the performance of certain irrational,
often ritualistic, behaviors (compulsions).

Everyone engages in these types of behavior to a
certain extent—counting steps as we walk up them, double-checking to make sure we’ve turned off the oven or
locked the door—but in a person with OCD, such behaviors are so greatly exaggerated that they interfere with
relationships and day-to-day functioning at school or
work. A child with a counting compulsion, for example,
might not be able to listen to what the teacher is saying
because he or she is too busy counting the syllables of
the teacher’s words as they are spoken.
These are some of the signs that a child might be
suffering from OCD:
• Avoidance of scissors or other sharp objects. A child
might be obsessed with fears of hurting herself or others.
• Chronic lateness or the appearance of dawdling. A
child could be performing checking rituals (e.g., repeatedly making sure all her school supplies are in her
bookbag).
• Daydreaming or preoccupation. A child might actually
be counting or balancing things mentally.
• Inordinate amounts of time spent in the bathroom. A
child could be involved in a hand-washing ritual.

Symptoms
Although there are marked similarities between
cases, no two people experience this anxiety disorder in
exactly the same way. In one common form of obsessive-compulsive disorder, an exaggerated fear of contamination (the obsession) leads to washing one’s hands so
much that they become raw (the compulsion). Other
common manifestations of OCD involve sorting, checking, and counting compulsions. Checking compulsions
462

seem to be more common among men, whereas washing
is more common among women. Another type of OCD
is trichotillomania, the compulsion to pull hair. The compulsive behavior is usually not related in any logical way
to the obsessive fear, or else it is clearly excessive (as in
the case of hand-washing).

• Late schoolwork. A child might be repeatedly checking
her work.
• Papers with holes erased in them. This might also indicate a checking ritual.
• Secretive and defensive behavior. People with OCD
will go to extreme lengths in order not to reveal or give
up their compulsions.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Causes
Sigmund Freud attributed obsessive-compulsive
disorder to traumatic toilet training and, although not
supported by any empirical evidence, this theory was
widely accepted for many years. Current research, however, indicates that OCD is neurobiological in origin, and
researchers have found physical differences between the
brains of OCD sufferers and those without the disorder.
Specifically, neurons in the brains of OCD patients appear to be overly sensitive to serotonin, the chemical
which transmits signals in the brain. A recent study at
the National Institute of Mental Health suggests a link
between childhood streptococcal infections and the
onset of OCD. Other research indicates that a predisposition for OCD is probably inherited. It is possible that
physical or mental stresses can precipitate the onset of
OCD in people with a predisposition towards it. Puberty
also appears to trigger the disorder in some people.

Prevalence
Once considered rare, OCD is now believed to affect
between 5 and 6 million Americans (2-3% of the population), which makes it almost as common as asthma or diabetes mellitus. Among mental disorders, OCD is the
fourth most prevalent (after phobias, substance abuse,
and depression ). In more than one-third of cases, onset
of OCD occurs in childhood or adolescence. Although
the disorder occurs equally among adults of both genders, among children it is three times more common in
boys than girls.

Treatment
Fewer than one in five OCD sufferers receive professional help; the typical OCD patient suffers for seven
years before seeking treatment. Many times, OCD is diagnosed when a patient sees a professional for another
problem, often depression. Major depression affects
close to one-third of patients with obsessive-compulsive
disorder.

In recent years, a new family of antidepressant
medications called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) has revolutionized the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. These drugs include
clomipramine (Anafranil), fluoxetine (Prozac), fluvoxamine (Luvox), and sertraline (Zoloft). They work by
altering the level of serotonin available to transmit signals in the brain. Thanks to these medications, the overwhelming majority of OCD sufferers (75-90%) can be
successfully treated.
In addition to medication, an extreme type of behavior therapy is sometimes used in patients with OCD.
In exposure-response prevention therapy, a patient slowly gives up his or her compulsive behaviors with the help
of a therapist. Someone with a hand-washing compulsion, for example, would have to touch something perceived as unclean and then refrain from washing his/her
hands. The resulting extreme anxiety eventually diminishes when the patient realizes that nothing terrible is
going to happen.
Further Reading
Rapoport, Judith L. The Boy Who Couldn’t Stop Washing: The
Experience and Treatment of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. New York: E.P. Dutton, 1989.

Further Information
The Obsessive-Compulsive Foundation Inc. P.O. Box 70, Milford, CT 06460–0070, (203) 878–5669, (800) NEWS-4OCD.
Obsessive Compulsive Anonymous (OCA). P.O. Box 215,
New Hyde Park, NY 11040, (516) 741–4901.
The Obsessive Compulsive Information Center. Dean Foundation for Health, Research and Education, 8000 Excelsior
Drive, Suite 302, Madison, WI 53717-1914, (608)
836–8070. http://www.fairlite.com/ocd.

Occupational therapist
A professional who promotes health, enhances development, and increases independent functioning
in people through activities involving work, play,
and self-care.

Occupational therapists help persons with both
physical and emotional problems as well as learning difficulties. Although occupational therapy was initially associated with reintegrating veterans of First and Second
World Wars into the work force, the term “occupation”
used in the context of this profession actually refers to
any activity with which persons occupy their time. Occupational therapists focus on helping people master the
everyday activities of life and work.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

463

Occupational therapist

Although people with OCD realize that their
thought processes are irrational, they are unable to control their compulsions, and they become painfully embarrassed when a bizarre behavior is discovered. Usually
certain behaviors called rituals are repeated in response
to an obsession. Rituals only temporarily reduce discomfort or anxiety caused by an obsession, and thus they
must be repeated frequently. However, the fear that
something terrible will happen if a ritual is discontinued
often locks OCD sufferers into a life ruled by what appears to be superstition.

Oedipus complex

Occupational therapists undergo a rigorous training
program. Four-year undergraduate programs, offered by
many institutions, include courses in anatomy, psychology, and the theory and practice of occupational therapy.
In addition, occupational therapists must complete six to
nine months of clinical training. After graduation, most
take a national examination to qualify as a Registered
Occupational Therapist (R.O.T.). Occupational therapists
work in various settings, including hospitals, nursing
homes, rehabilitation centers, schools, day care centers,
and patients’ homes.
Occupational therapists work with people who have
mental and emotional problems. Their goal is to help
clients cope with daily life, which may include teaching
skills in self-care, cooking, shopping, and budgeting.
They may help people suffering from depression, anxiety, or obsessive-compulsive disorder plan their day in
order to function more effectively.
Further Reading
Breines, Estelle. Occupational Therapy Activities from Clay to
Computers: Theory and Practice. Philadelphia: F.A.
Davis Company, 1995.

Further Information
The American Occupational Therapy Association. 1383 Piccard Drive, P.O. Box 1725, Rockville, MD 20850.

In traditional Freudian psychoanalytical theory, the
term Electra complex was used when these unconscious
wishes were attributed to a young girl and centered
around sexual involvement with her father and jealous rivalry with her mother. Like Oedipus, Electra is a figure
in Greek mythology who participated in the killing of
her parent (in Electra’s case, her mother). Contemporary
psychology no longer distinguishes this complex by gender, and the Electra complex is included in the definition
of the Oedipus complex.
Modern interpretations of Freudian theories are
often critical, and his Oedipus theory has been no exception. Many current psychologists think of it as too simplistic, and the authors of the Oxford Companion to the
Mind (1987) state, “Freud’s formula . . . gives a onesided and too simple an account of the complex interactions of the family.” It would be fair to say that this is the
current view of Freud’s Oedipal notions. Yet, looking to
Freud’s Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis (1920),
Freud writes, “I do not wish to assert that the Oedipus
complex exhausts the relation of children to their parents: it can easily be far more complicated. The Oedipus
complex can, moreover, be developed to a greater or
lesser strength, it can even be reversed; but it is a regular
and very important factor in a child’s mental life.”
Further Reading

Oedipus complex
The theory that children are torn between feelings
of love for one parent while feeling a sense of competition with the other; first put forth by Sigmund
Freud as one possible cause of neuroses in later
life.

Sigmund Freud first suggested the existence of
what he would later call the Oedipus complex in The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). In this work, he describes
a subconscious feelings in children of intense competition and even hatred toward the parent of the same sex,
and feelings of romantic love toward the parent of the
opposite sex. He felt that if these conflicting feelings
were not successfully resolved, they would contribute to
neuroses in later life. The name “Oedipus” refers to
Oedipus Rex, the classic Greek play by Sophocles,
which tells the story of Oedipus, who is abandoned at
birth by his parents, King Lauis and Queen Jocasta. He
later comes back and, as foretold by prophecy, kills his
father and marries his mother before finding out his true
identity. Freud saw in the play an archetypal dynamic
being played out, and so coopted the character’s name
for his description.
464

Montrelay, Michele. “Why Did You Tell Me I Love Mommy
and That’s Why I’m Frightened When I Love You.” American Imago (Summer 1994): 213.
Sophocles. Oedipus Rex. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press, 1982.
Tabin, Johanna. On the Way to Self. New York: Columbia University Press, 1985.

Operant conditioning
Approach to human learning based on the premise
that human intelligence and will operate on the environment rather than merely respond to the environment’s stimuli.

Operant conditioning is an elaboration of classical
conditioning. Operant conditioning holds that human
learning is more complex than the model developed by
Ivan Pavlov (1849-1936) and involves human intelligence and will operating (thus its name) on its environment rather than being a slave to stimuli.
The Pavlovian model of classical conditioning was
revolutionary in its time but eventually came to be seen
as limited in its application to most human behavior,
which is far more complex than a series of automatic re-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

NEGATIVE

When a person receives reinforcement after engaging in some behavior, the person is likely to repeat
that behavior.

When a person experiences a negative state and does something to
eliminate the undesired state, the
person is likely to repeat that
behavior.

When a person engages in a behavior and something negative is
applied as a result, that behavior is
less likely to be repeated.

When a person engages in a behavior and something positive is taken
away, that behavior is less likely to
be repeated.

REINFORCEMENT
The frequency of a behavior is
increased because of the behavior
of the subject.

PUNISHMENT
The frequency of a behavior is
decreased because of the behavior
of the subject.

sponses to various stimuli. B.F. Skinner (1904-1990)
elaborated on this concept by introducing the idea of
consequences into the behaviorist formula of human
learning. Pavlov’s classical conditioning explained behavior strictly in terms of stimuli, demonstrating a causal
relationship between stimuli and behavior. In Pavlov’s
model, humans responded to stimuli in specific, predictable ways. According to Skinner, however, behavior
is seen as far more complex, allowing for the introduction of choice and free will. According to operant conditioning, the likelihood that a behavior will be repeated
depends to a great degree on the amount of pleasure (or
pain) that behavior has caused or brought about in the
past. Skinner also added to the vocabulary of behaviorism the concepts of negative and positive reinforcer and
of punishment.
According to the Skinner model of operant conditioning humans learn behaviors based on a trial and error
process whereby they remember what behaviors elicited
positive, or pleasurable, responses and which elicited
negative ones. He derived these theories from observing
the behaviors of rats and pigeons isolated in what have
come to be known as Skinner boxes. Inside the boxes,
rats that had been deprived of food were presented with a
lever that, when pushed, would drop a pellet of food into
the cage. Of course, the rat wouldn’t know this, and so
the first time it hit the lever, it was a purely accidental,
the result of what Skinner called random trial and error
behavior. Eventually, however, the rat would “learn” that
hitting the lever resulted in the appearance of food and it
would continue doing so. Receiving the food, then, in the
language of operant conditioning, is considered the reinforcer while hitting the lever becomes the operant, the
way the organism operates on its environment.
Skinner’s model of operant conditioning broke
down reinforcements into four kinds to study the effects
these various “schedules of reinforcement” would have

on behavior. These schedules are: fixed interval, variable
interval, fixed ration, and variable ration. In a fixed interval schedule experiment, the lever in the rat’s box would
only provide food at a specific rate, regardless of how
often the rat pulled the lever. In other words, food would
be provided every 60 seconds. Eventually, the rat adapts
to this schedule, pushing the lever with greater frequency
approximately every 60 seconds. In variable interval experiments, the lever becomes active at random intervals.
Rats presented with this problem adapt by pressing the
lever less frequently but at more regular intervals. An experiment using a fixed ratio schedule uses a lever that becomes active only after the rat pulls it a specific number
of times, and in a variable ration experiment the number
of pulls between activity is random. Behavior of the rats
adapts to these conditions and is adjusted to provide the
most rewards.
The real-world ramifications of operant conditioning experiments are easy to imagine, and many of the experiments described would probably sound very familiar
to parents who use such systems of rewards and punishments on a daily basis with their children regardless of
whether they have ever heard of B.F. Skinner. His model
has been used by learning theorists of various sorts to describe all kinds of human behaviors. Since the 1960s,
however, behaviorism has taken a back seat to cognitive
theories of learning, although few dispute the elementary
tenets of operant conditioning and their use in the acquisition of rudimentary adaptive behaviors.
Further Reading
Blackman, Derek E. Operant Conditioning: An Experimental
Analysis of Behaviour. London: Methuen, 1974.
Mackintosh, Nicholas John. Conditioning and Associative
Learning. New York: Oxford University Press, 1983.
Smith, Terry L. Behavior and Its Causes: Philosophical Foundations of Operant Psychology. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1994.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

465

Operant conditioning

POSITIVE

Oppositional-defiant disorder

Oppositional-defiant disorder
A form of antisocial behavior disorder characterized
by opposition to authority figures such as parents
and teachers, and by excessive anger and hostility.

Depending on the population, 2-6% of children have
oppositional-defiant disorder. Oppositional-defiant disorder is similar to conduct disorder, without the more severe behavior components of aggression, property destruction, deceit, and theft. Oppositional-defiant children
often go on to develop conduct disorder. Many children,
especially during transitional periods such as preschool
and adolescence, exhibit transient oppositional behavior
towards parents and peers that will decline as they mature.
If oppositional behavior is initiated during adolescence in
particular it is probably part of the child’s process of individuation, and should not be mistaken for a disorder. Children with oppositional-defiant disorder (1) are oppositional much more frequently than other children of their age
and (2) increase their oppositional behaviors rather than
decrease them with age. Disobedience and hostility usually appear first in the home environment, and may or may
not ever emerge in school settings. Oppositional-defiant
disorder is more common in families where there is marital discord, where a parent has a history of an antisocial,
mood, or attention disorder, and where child rearing
practices are either harsh (punishing), inconsistent (a succession of different caregivers), or neglectful.

Criteria for diagnosis
According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), oppositional-defiant disorder is diagnosed when (1) there is a pattern of defiant,
disobedient, and hostile behavior towards authority figures lasting for at least six months, including frequent
occurrence of at least four of the following behaviors;
(2) the child exhibits the behaviors more frequently than
other individuals of the same age or developmental level.
The child with oppositional-defiant disorder will:
• often lose his or her temper
• often argue with adults
• defy or refuse to comply with requests or rules
• deliberately do things that annoy other people
• blame others for his or her own mistakes
• be touchy or easily annoyed
• be angry and resentful
• be spiteful or vindictive.
Care should be taken to distinguish oppositional-defiant behavior that results from other problems, such as
466

mood or psychotic disorders, attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, mental retardation, and language disorders.
See also Antisocial behavior; Conduct disorder
Further Reading
Bernstein, Neil I. Treating the Unmanageable Adolescent: A
Guide to Oppositional Defiant and Conduct Disorders.
Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson, 1997.
Price, Jerome A. Power and Compassion: Working with Difficult Adolescents and Abused Parents. New York: Guilford
Press, 1996.
Wenning, Kenneth. Winning Cooperation from Your Child!: A
Comprehensive Method to Stop Defiant and Aggressive
Behavior in Children. Northvale, NJ: J. Aronson, 1996.

Organic disorder
Disorder caused by a known pathological condition.

In general, any disorder that is caused by a known
pathological condition of an organic structure may be categorized as an organic disorder, or more specifically, as an
organic mental disorder, or a psychological disorder. An
example is delirium, a disorder that is caused by a known
physical dysfunction of the brain. Most psychologists and
psychiatrists now believe that virtually all serious, or psychotic, mental disorders will eventually be proven to have
an organic cause. Consequently, many psychologists and
psychiatrists prefer not to use the term organic mental disorder because the term implies that those disorders which
have not yet been shown to have an organic cause do not
have an organic cause, and that functional disorders (a
term that has often been contrasted with the term organic
disorders) have no organic causal component.

Organizational psychology
See Industrial psychology

Arthur Otis
1886-1964
American psychologist whose most enduring work
was done in the field of group intelligence testing.

Arthur Otis was born in Denver, Colorado, and educated at Stanford University. He served on the faculty of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Intelligence quotient

psychologists. However, clinical psychologist Marilyn
Sorenson in her book, Breaking the Chain of Low SelfEsteem, maintains that people with low self-esteem
often find themselves driven to overachieve to build selfworth. Overachievers increasingly take on new projects
and drive themselves to perfection, often becoming
known as “workaholics.” Overachievement may occur in
one area of a person’s life without pervading the entire
life. The fear of failure drives underachievers, according
to Sorenson. Gripped by their fears of failure and humiliation, underachievers fail to realize their skill or talent
potential. While often viewed with a negative connotation, overachievement has come to be valued in a number of corporations, competing to remain at the top of
their field. Sometimes the term is used in informal communication to describe a person intent on gathering tangible or recognized symbols of accomplishment, such as
educational degrees, awards, and honorary positions.
See also Perfectionism

Overachiever
A person whose performance disproportionately
exceeds ability; academically, a student, whose
academic achievement disproportionately exceeds
his or her performance on standardized intelligence tests.

The terms “overachiever” and “underachiever,” most
often applied to school and academia, both refer to gaps
between academic performance and IQ test scores. Generally, these terms are not used by either educators or

Further Reading
Sorensen, Marilyn J. Breaking the Chain of Low Self-Esteem.
Sherwood, OR: Wolf Pub., 1998.

Overactive children
See Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD)

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

467

Overactive children

Stanford University, and held various consulting and research positions at several U.S. government agencies.
He was also an editor of tests in mathematics for an educational publishing company. Otis introduced and developed the Otis Group Intelligence Scale, which is considered to be the earliest scientifically reliable instrument for the intelligence testing of subjects in groups.
First published in 1918, the Otis Group Intelligence
Scale consisted of verbal and nonverbal items and became very widely used, especially in schools. The test
was substantially revised by Roger Lennon, and continues to be used. Otis’ books include: Statistical Method
in Educational Measurement (1925), Modern School
Arithmetic (1929), and Primary Arithmetic Through Experience (1939).

P
Pain
Physical suffering resulting from some sort of injury
or disease, experienced through the central nervous system.

Pain is a complex phenomenon that scientists are
still struggling to understand. Its purpose is to alert the
body of damage or danger to its system, yet scientists do
not fully understand the level and intensity of pain
sometimes experienced by people. Long-lasting, severe
pain does not serve the same purpose as acute pain,
which triggers an immediate physical response. Pain
that persists without diminishing over long periods of
time is known as chronic pain. It is estimated that almost one-third of all Americans suffer from some form
of chronic pain. Of these, 70 million have back pain, 36
million have arthritis, 20 million suffer from migraine
headaches, and at least 800,000 Americans suffer severe
pain associated with the growth of cancerous tumors.
An additional kind of pain is psychological pain. Recent
research has shown that the chemicals produced by anxiety are similar to those that are released in response to
physical injury.
Pain signals travel through the body along billions
of special nerve cells reserved specifically for transmitting pain messages. These cells are known as nociceptors. The chemical neurotransmitters carrying the message include prostaglandins, bradykinin—the most
painful substance known to humans—and a chemical
known as P, which stands for pain. Prostaglandins are
manufactured from fatty acids in nearly every tissue in
the body. Analgesic pain relievers, such as aspirin and
ibuprofen, work by inhibiting prostaglandin production.
After an injury, cells near the trauma site release
these chemicals into the central nervous system. In the
spinal cord, they are carried by the dorsal horn, and it is
at this point that the body pulls away from the source of
the pain. When the signal reaches the brain, it is first
processed by the thalamus and then passed to the cere468

bral cortex. Here, the brain fully processes the information, locates its source in the body, and begins sending
signals to relieve the pain.
As they travel, the pain messages are sorted according to severity. Recent research has discovered that the
body has two distinct pathways for transmitting pain
messages. The epicritic system is used to transmit messages of sudden, intense pain, such as that caused by cuts
or burns. The neurons that transmit such messages are
called A fibers, and they are built to transmit messages
quickly. The protopathic system is used to transmit less
severe messages of pain, such as the kind one might experience from over-strenuous exercise. The C fibers of
the protopathic system do not send messages as quickly
as A fibers.
In 1965, Ronald Melzack and Patrick Wall, leading
pain researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, proposed what has come to be known as the gate
theory of pain. This theory holds that the nervous system has the capacity to process only limited amounts of
information at a time. For example, if the body is overwhelmed by multiple messages, the nervous system will
“shut down” certain messages. This would explain why
rubbing an injury often lessens its pain. The rubbing, in
essence, competes with the injury for space in the nervous system.
One application of the gate theory is the use of small
bursts of electricity to help manage pain. Experiments
were first conducted on animals, whose brains were
stimulated electronically at certain points, shutting down
their capacity to feel pain. The animals were then operated on using no anesthetic. This method has been adapted
for humans as well and has led to the development of a
pain relief method known as transcutaneous electrical
nerve stimulation, or TENS. In this technique, pain sufferers are jolted with tiny bits of electricity at strategic
points. As predicted by the gate theory, the nerve endings
at the point of the shock are overwhelmed and divert
some of the space in the central nervous system to processing it, thereby relieving the original pain.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Treatments for pain vary widely. For mild pain, the
most common form of treatment is aspirin, a medication
discovered in the 19th century and derived from salicin,
a chemical found in the bark of the willow tree. Today,
there are several aspirin-like drugs on the market for the
relief of minor, inflammatory pain, including ibuprofen
and acetaminophen. For more severe pain, opiates—derived from the opium poppy, a common flowering
plant—are often used. Opiates work by attaching themselves, on the molecular level, to nerve cells normally
used to transmit pain messages. (The place on the nerve
cells where the opiates reside are called opiate receptors). Opiates work very well in relieving pain, but are
quite dangerous and can become addictive.
In the 1970s, scientists began looking for natural opiate-like substances, and found that the body does indeed
produce its own painkillers, which has come to be called
opioids. The two most common opioids are endorphins
and enkephalins. These chemicals attach themselves to
the opiate receptors in nerve cells just as opiates do. It has
been found that the body can be stimulated to release
these chemicals by TENS and by acupuncture, a Chinese
method of placing tiny needles at specific points in the
body to relieve pain. Other methods for treating pain include hypnotism, massage, and biofeedback.
Further Reading
Arnold, Caroline. Pain: What Is It? How Do We Deal With It?
New York: William Morrow and Company, 1986.
Atkinson, Jim. “Nerve Center.” Texas Monthly (June 1994): 54.
Bower, Bruce. “Brain Changes Linked to Phantom-Limb
Pain.” Science News (10 June 1995).
Chase, Marilyn. “When Treating Pain, All Roads Lead to the
Brain.” Wall Street Journal (17 October 1994): B1.
Strobel, Gabrielle. “Pain Message Travels via Diffuse Signal.”
Science News (27 November 1993).
”Tips for Coping with Chronic Agony.” USA. Today Magazine
(October 1993): 3.

Paired-associate (PA) learning was invented by
Mary Whiton Calkins in 1894 and involves the pairing of
two items (usually words)—a stimulus and a response.
For example, words such as calendar (stimulus) and
shoe (response) may be paired, and when the learner is
prompted with the stimulus, he responds with the appropriate word (shoe).
The study of PA learning has been important for a
number of reasons. Psychologists view it as representative of the kind of learning that people engage in every
day. For example, when learning a new word, a person
must pair the word itself with the concept it represents.
This is the essence of PA learning. Another reason is that
it allows researchers to study the associations between
stimuli and responses. Although this stimulus-response
approach has lost some of its importance in contemporary psychology, researchers—especially behaviorists—
have been interested in how stimulus-response links are
formed and broken.
Psychological research has revealed that when people learn paired associates, they engage in two separate
mental processes. The first is the learning of the response;
the second is the formation of a bond between the two
words. This second process seems to produce a one-way
association in many circumstances. That is, a learner is
much more likely to remember the response word if given
the stimulus; people have a harder time remembering the
stimulus if presented with the response word.
This pattern holds true when the response has never
been used as a stimulus. On the other hand, if a particular word (e.g., cloud ) has been used both as a stimulus
and as a response (e.g., cloud-pen and bag-cloud ), the
learner gets accustomed to using the word in two ways.
In later testing, the subject is likely to remember the
word pair correctly when presented with either word.
Based on research such as this, psychologists have concluded that learners remember the word pair as a unit,
not as a stimulus that simply leads to a response.
Further Reading
Deese, J., and S.H. Hulse. The Psychology of Learning. 3rd ed.
New York: McGrawHill, 1967.

Panic/Panic disorders
An acute feeling of intense fear, accentuated by increased heart rate, shortness of breath, sweating,
and mild convulsions.

Paired-associate learning
Strategy used by psychologists to study learning.

Feelings of fear and panic are common to all
species, and humans are certainly no exception. Psycho-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

469

Panic/Panic disorders

Chronic pain, on the other hand, presents its own set
of problems. Treating chronic pain is difficult because by
its very nature, such pain damages the central nervous
system, making it weaker and more susceptible to pain.
This residue of pain is called pain memory. Problems
also arise when nerve cells are damaged by chemotherapy, diabetes, shingles, and other diseases. And in the case
of arthritis and other inflammatory diseases, the body’s
threshold for pain is lowered, thus causing increased
pain from “less” stimuli.

Paranoia

logically speaking, however, panic can be an obtrusive,
life-altering phenomena for many people who suffer
panic attacks. Such attacks occur commonly in people
suffering from various phobias. People suffering from
agoraphobia, for instance, can expect to suffer panic attacks when out in public. While panic attacks are generally short-lived, their recurrence and the severity of the
physical symptoms that accompany them can lead people to fear them so intensely that they develop a more severe condition known as anxiety disorder.
Panic attacks usually originate as realistic responses
to fearful or stressful experiences, usually in childhood.
In more mature persons, however, memories of fearful
events are put in perspective, and people generally do not
feel the same fear they felt as a child when confronting a
similar situation as an adult. Often, however, certain people will be susceptible to a variety of subconscious triggers. For instance, a person may experience intense fear
every time he or she goes to the mall, not because of the
mall, per se, but perhaps because they once had a very
fearful experience, like being lost from a parent, in a
mall. Panic attacks can also be caused by internal reactions. For example, increased heart rate can remind a
person of an early panic experience, and every time his
or her heart rate increases, the person experiences another panic attack.
Psychiatrists have documented the physical manifestations of panic, and are fairly certain that there is a
genetic component to panic attacks. Neurologically, recent psychiatric research has identified a brain circuit
called the flight/fight system, or FFS. This neurologic
area, when stimulated in animals, produces features of
tremendous fear and panic. Research in this area is still
very new, and with each finding there are controversies
and conflicting views. Brain imaging technology should
help psychiatrists better understand the neurology of
panic attacks, but they are still largely a mystery.
Further Reading
Chase, Marilyn. “Psychiatry Finds Answers to Mystery of
Panic Attacks.” Wall Street Journal (12 June 1995): B1.
Segal, Mariah. “Panic Disorder: The Heart That Goes Thump
in the Night—and Day.” FDA Consumer (April 1992): 22.
Seymour, Lesley Jane. “Fear of Almost Everything.” Mademoiselle (September 1993): 252.
”What Triggers Panic Attacks?” USA. Today Magazine (October 1992): 2.

Paranoia
A pervasive feeling of distrust of others.
470

Paranoia is an ever-present feeling of suspicion that
others cannot be trusted. Such feelings are not based on
fact or reality; insecurity and low self-esteem often exaggerate these emotions. Typically, paranoia is not seen
in children, but in most cases it begins to develop in late
adolescence and early adulthood. Most people experience feelings of paranoia, usually in response to a threatening situation or in connection with feelings of insecurity based on real circumstances. These feelings are related to the mild anxiety people experience at some
points during their lives.
The fourth edition of Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) includes diagnostic criteria for the more serious condition, paranoid
personality disorder. According to the DSM-IV, individuals afflicted with this disorder assume, with little concrete evidence to support the assumption, that others
plan to exploit, harm, or deceive him or her; and continually analyzes the motivations of friends, family, and others to confirm his or her doubts about their trustworthiness; expects friends and family to abandon him or her in
times of trouble or stress; avoids revealing personal information because of fear that it will be used against
him or her; interprets remarks and actions as having hidden, demeaning, and threatening connotations; and is unwilling to forgive an insult. The behaviorof an individual
with paranoid personality disorder may compel others to
react with anger or hostility. This tends to reinforce the
individual’s suspiciousness and feelings that friends and
associates are “against” him or her.
In the 1990s, the term “everyday paranoia” (EP)
came into usage among psychologists to describe the intense anxiety that was becoming prevalent in society.
Everyday paranoia is sparked by fear of losing one’s job,
feelings of inadequacy when confronting a new interpersonal or romantic relationship, or insecurity in a marriage or other long-term relationship. Low self-esteem
and feelings of insecurity contribute to a person’s susceptibility to feelings of everyday paranoia. Stressful situations—economic insecurity, divorce, a move, a job
change—can also reinforce a person’s paranoia. Almost
everyone experiences feelings of suspicion or insecurity—and in fact, paranoia can be a mechanism for coping
with misfortune or personal problems. Rather than view
the situation as “bad luck” or personal failure or incompetence, paranoia places the responsibility for the problem on some “enemy.”
The term paranoia is used erroneously at times to
define special life circumstances. Members of minority
groups and new immigrants may exhibit guarded behavior due to unfamiliarity with their new environment and
lack of knowledge of language and cultural norms. This
display of suspicion of authority figures and lack of trust

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4th ed.
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association, 1994.
Goodwin, Jan. “Paranoia.” Cosmopolitan (August 1994):184+.
Kelly, Michael. “The Road to Paranoia.” The New Yorker (June
19, 1995): 60+.

Masochism (Sexual)
Masochism is a term applied to a specific sexual disorder but which also has a broader usage. The sexual disorder involves pleasure and excitement produced by
pain, either inflicted by others or by oneself. It usually
begins in childhood or adolescence and is chronic.
Masochism is the only paraphilia in which any noticeable
number of women participate—about 5 percent of
masochists are female. The term comes from the name of
a nineteenth century Austrian writer, Leopold von Sacher-Masoch, whose novels often included characters who
were obsessed with the combination of sex and pain.
In the broader sense, masochism refers to any experience of receiving pleasure or satisfaction from suffering pain. The psychoanalytic view is that masochism is
aggression turned inward, onto the self, when a person
feels too guilty or afraid to express it outwardly.

Pedophilia

Paraphilia
Sexual feelings or behaviors that may involve sexual partners that are not human, not consenting, or
that involve suffering by one or both partners.

To diagnose an individual with a paraphilia, the psychologist or other diagnostician must confirm recurrent,
intense, sexually arousing feelings, fantasies, or behaviors over a period of at least six months. According to the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM-IV), it is not uncommon for an individual to have
more than one paraphilia.

Bestiality
Bestiality is a term that describes sexual feelings or
behaviors involving animals. Termed zoophilia by the
fourth edition of Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), this is a relatively uncommon disorder. The disorder does not specify an animal or
category of animals; the person with zoophilia may
focus sexual feelings on domesticated animals, such as
dogs, or farm animals, such as sheep or goats.

Exhibitionism
Exhibitionism is the exposure of genitals to a nonconsenting stranger. In some cases, the individual may
also engage in autoeroticism while exposing himself.
Generally, no additional contact with the observer is
sought; the individual is stimulated sexually by gaining
the attention of and startling the observer.

Pedophilia involves sexual activity with a child,
generally under age 13. The Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders describes a criterion that the
individual with pedophilia be over 16 years of age and
be at least five years older than the child. Individuals
with this disorder may be attracted to either males or females or both, although incidents of pedophilic activity
are almost twice as likely to be repeated by those individuals attracted to males. Individuals with this disorder
develop procedures and strategies for gaining access to
and trust of children.

Sadomasochism
Sadomasochism applies to deviant sexual behavior
in which an individual achieves gratification either by
experiencing pain (masochism) or inflicting it on another
(sadism).
In psychoanalytic theory, sadism is related to the
fear of castration, while the behaviorist explanation of
sadomasochism is that its constituent feelings are physiologically similar to sexual arousal. Separate but parallel
descriptions are given for sexual sadism and sexual
masochism in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) . The clinical diagnostic criteria for both are recurrence of the behavior over a period of at least six months, and significant distress or impairment of the ability to function as a result of the behavior or associated urges or fantasies. Either type of behavior may be limited to fantasies (sometimes while one
is engaged in outwardly nondeviant sex) or acted out
with a consenting partner, a non-consenting partner, or in
the case of masochism, alone. Sadomasochism occurs in

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

471

Paraphilia

in outsiders is based on a real lack of understanding of
the person’s surroundings, and does not represent an abnormal reaction. In addition, the term “political paranoia” is used to describe attitudes shared by members of
groups on the fringes of society who suspect that government agencies are conspiring to control the lives of citizens by imposing new values, or suspect that other dominant groups are persecuting them. The growth of paramilitary organizations in the United States in recent
years appears to be indicative of such feelings of political paranoia among a small percentage of citizens.

Parapsychology

both males and females, and in both heterosexual and
homosexual relationships.
Sadistic activities, which may express dominance or
inflict pain and /or humiliation on the other person, include restraint, blindfolding, whipping, burning, rape,
stabbing, strangulation, and even death. Masochists may
seek to be the object of some of these acts as well as
other types of humiliation, including forced cross-dressing. A particularly dangerous and fatal masochistic practice is hypoxyphilia, which consists of deliberately cutting off one’s oxygen supply through mechanical or
chemical means. Both sadistic and masochistic fantasies
usually begin in childhood, and the disorders usually
manifest in early adulthood. When associated with antisocial personality disorder, it may result in serious injury to others or death.

See also Pedophilia
Further Reading
Baumeister, Roy F. Escaping the Self: Alcoholism, Spirituality,
Masochism, and Other Flights from the Burden of Selfhood. New York: Basic Books, 1991.
Caplan, Paula J. The Myth of Women’s Masochism. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press, 1993.
Carnes, Patrick. Out of the Shadows: Understanding Sexual
Addiction. 2nd ed. Center City, MN: Hazelden Educational Materials, 1992.

Parapsychology

Voyeurism
Voyeurism is a paraphilia in which a person finds
sexual excitement in watching unsuspecting people who
are nude, undressing, or having sex. Voyeurs are almost
always male, and the victims are usually strangers. A
voyeur may fantasize about having sex with the victim
but almost never actually pursues this. The voyeur may
return to watch the same stranger repeatedly, but there is
rarely physical contact.
Voyeurs are popularly known as “peeping Toms,”
based on the eleventh-century legend of Lady Godiva.
According to the story, Tom was a tailor who “peeped”
at Lady Godiva as she rode naked through the streets of
Coventry, England, in a sacrificial act to get her husband
to lower taxes. Tom was struck with blindness for not
looking away like everyone else did.

Incidence and treatment
Psychologists estimate that a greater percentage of
people experience sexual deviance than is officially reported. This is because many people who carry out sexual deviations do not consider their activities to be deviant. For instance, sadomasochists have group meetings, workshops, and large gatherings and have become
something of a subculture. They do not typically think of
themselves as needing therapy or treatment.
People who seek treatment for paraphilias often do
so because they have been cited for illegal activity or because they are afraid they may do something illegal and
be caught for it. Many different treatments have been
tried with paraphilias, from medication to group therapy, to eliminate the behavior. Psychologists report low
success rates, especially among criminally charged child
molesters. Behavior modification is most likely to suc472

ceed when a combination of therapy, aversion technique
(using electric shock or visualization to change pleasure
experience), and medication is employed.

Meaning “beside psychology,” term used to describe the study of paranormal, or psi, phenomena,
the most significant being extra-sensory perception
(ESP) and psychokinesis (PK).

The study of paranormal activities and phenomena
has been riddled with controversy since its conception. It
is claimed that some people, utilizing senses beyond the
ordinary, exhibit powers that cannot be explained by traditional science. Skeptics of the paranormal point to the
fact that in over a century since the first serious studies
of the paranormal began, usually dated to the opening of
the Society for Psychical Research in London in 1882,
no replicable demonstration of any such powers has ever
been conducted. Yet many people continue to believe in
the existence of the paranormal.
The most studied and debated paranormal phenomena are ESP and psychokinesis. ESP is an acronym for
extra-sensory perception and encompasses clairvoyance, the ability to perceive something without the use of
the senses, and telepathy, the ability to communicate
with another person without the use of the senses. (Parapsychologists currently refer to telepathy as “anomalous
processes of information or energy transfer.”)
Clairvoyance was the first paranormal phenomena to
be seriously considered by scientists, probably because
devising tests to prove or disprove its existence was easy.
In the late 1920s, many such tests were devised by J.B.
Rhine, a psychology professor who had left Harvard University to help found the Parapsychology Laboratory at
Duke University. Rhine’s tests often produced positive results for clairvoyance, and at the time his work was seriously regarded. In recent decades, however, much of
Rhine’s work has been discredited as being biased, careless, and, in some cases, utterly fraudulent.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Psychokinesis (PK) is the ability to manipulate
physical objects with the mind. Probably the most infamous purveyor of psychokinetic powers was the Israeli
psychic and entertainer Uri Geller, who became an international celebrity by bending spoons, supposedly with
his mind. During his career, he would never demonstrate
his spoon bending ability in a controlled environment,
and he was on several occasions shown to be faking. Another form of PK is known as spontaneous PK, in which
a physical action occurs in response to psychological
trauma. There are personal accounts, for instance, of
clocks and watches stopping at the moment of a loved
one’s death. J.B. Rhine was one of the first to conduct
experiments in PK, primarily with the use of dice. He
tested a subject’s ability to influence the outcome of a
toss and found that many people demonstrated a slight
ability, beyond chance, of “controlling” the dice.
There are other phenomena studies by parapsychologists, including hauntings, UFOs, near-death and afterdeath experiences, out-of-body experiences, psychic
healing, and many others. All of these share the curious
nature of ESP and PK in that, anecdotally speaking, occurrences are widespread, believed by members of many
cultures, and discussed throughout history. Yet none have
been scientifically demonstrated or reproduced. Despite
the lack of proof, many people firmly believe in the paranormal, as evidenced by personal testimony, the popularity of television shows such as “The X-Files,” and by the
huge profits generated by psychic phone lines and other
occult enterprises. One of the reasons the scientific community is skeptical about paranormal phenomena is that
there is no apparent basis in physical laws for such phenomena. In every other scientific discipline, it is possible
to speculate reasonably that events occur as they do because they follow a recognized natural law, such as gravity or conservation of energy. Parapsychologists have
failed to develop adequate theoretical reasons for the existence of the phenomena they purport to demonstrate.

Nevertheless, it seems that most people are open to the
possibility of the paranormal despite the lack of evidence.
Further Reading
Blackmore, Susan. “Psi in Psychology.” Skeptical Inquirer
(Summer 1994): 351.
Bower, B. “CIA Studies Fan Debate Over Psi Abilities.” Science News (9 December 1995): 390.
————. “Scientists Peer into the Mind’s Psi.” Science News
(29 January 1994): 68.
Irwin, H.J. An Introduction to Parapsychology. Jefferson, NC:
McFarland & Co., 1989.
Jaroff, Leon. “Weird Science: Catering to Viewers’ Growing
Appetite for Paranormal . . .” Time (15 May 1995): 75.
Yam, Philip. “A Skeptically Inquiring Mind.” Scientific American (July 1995): 34.

Parent-child relationships
The relationship, over the full extent of a child’s development, between parent and child.

Of the many different relationships we form over the
course of the life span, the relationship between parent
and child is among the most important. Not surprisingly,
students of child development have devoted considerable
attention to the parent-child relationship, in order to understand how it develops and functions over the lifespan.
Among the many questions researchers examine are those
concerning normative changes in the parent-child relationship over the course of development (e.g., How does the
parent-child relationship change during adolescence?), the
impact of variations in the parent-child relationship on the
child’s behavior and functioning (e.g., Which types of discipline are most effective during the preschool years?),
and the effects of the parent-child relationship on the parent (e.g., How are adults affected by parenthood?).

Infancy
A baby cries, a parent feeds her; a baby snuggles, a
parent hugs her. Day after day, night after night, mothers
and fathers feed, burp, wash, change, dress, and hold
their babies. Out of these interactions, feelings and expectations grow. The baby feels distressed and hungry,
then satisfied; the parent feels tenderness, joy, annoyance, exhaustion, pleasure. Gradually, the baby begins to
expect that her parent will care for her when she cries.
Gradually, parents respond to and even anticipate their
baby’s needs. These elements form the basis for a developing relationship, a combination of behaviors, interactions, feelings, and expectations that are unique to a particular parent and a particular child.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

473

Parent-child relationships

Recent studies have proven more reputable but far
from conclusive. One such study revealed statistically
significant telepathic abilities among 100 men and 140
women tested in Scotland over six years in the mid1980s. In the tests, “senders” focused on images or video
clips and attempted to send those impressions to a “receiver” in a sensory-isolated room. The researchers reported that one in three sessions led to a “hit,” meaning
that the receiver reported visualizing images similar to
those being sent. A hit is expected to occur by chance in
one in four instances. On the other hand, the Central Intelligence Agency of the United States discounted the
existence of ESP after conducting its own experiments in
“remote viewing.” The agency concluded that there were
not enough evidence for its existence.

Parent-child relationships

By the end of the first year, most infants who are
cared for in families develop an attachment relationship, usually with the primary caretaker. This relationship is central to the child’s development.
Developmental psychologists have studied attachment in infancy mainly by watching how infants react
when they are separated from, and then reunited with,
their caregiver (usually one of the infant’s parents). An
experimental laboratory procedure called the Strange
Situation is the most common assessment. Researchers
have been particularly interested in understanding individual differences in the quality of attachment is inferred
from behavior in the Strange Situation. The majority of
children develop a secure attachment: when reunited
with their caregiver after a temporary absence of several
minutes, they greet her in two distinctive ways. If distressed, they want to be picked up and find comfort in
her arms; if content, they smile, talk to her, or show her a
toy. In contrast, some children with an insecure attachment want to be picked up, but they are not comforted;
they kick or push away. Others seem indifferent to the
caregiver’s return, and ignore her when she returns.
The quality of the infant’s attachment seems to be
predictive of aspects of later development. Youngsters
who emerge from infancy with a secure attachment stand
a better chance of developing happy, competent relationships with others. The attachment relationship not only
forms the emotional basis for the continued development
of the parent-child relationship, but can serve as a foundation upon which subsequent social relationships are built.
Researchers disagree about the origins of a secure
attachment relationship. One account focuses on the way
caregivers behave toward their infants. According to this
view, the key element is the caregiver’s sensitivity in responding to the infant’s signals. Secure infants have
mothers who sensitively read their infant’s cues and respond appropriately to their needs.
Another perspective emphasizes the temperament
of the infants. A secure attachment is more easily formed
between a caregiver and an infant with an easier disposition, or temperament, than between a caregiver and an
infant who is characteristically negative, fearful, or not
especially sociable. In this respect, security of attachment may reflect what the infant is like rather than how
the caregiver behaves. Most likely, the early parent-child
relationship is the product both of what the infant and
caregiver bring to it.

Toddlerhood
When children move from infancy into toddlerhood,
the parent-child relationship begins to change its focus.
During infancy, the primary function of the parent-child
474

relationship is nurturance and predictability, and much of
the relationship revolves around the day-to-day demands
of caregiving: feeding, sleeping, toileting, bathing. The
attachment relationship develops out of these day-to-day
interactions.
As youngsters begin to talk and become more mobile during the second and third years of life, however,
parents usually attempt to shape their child’s social behavior. In essence, parents become teachers as well as
nurturers, providers of guidance as well as affection. The
process of socialization—preparing the youngster to
function as a member of a social group—implicit during
most of the first two years of life, becomes explicit as the
child moves toward his or her third birthday.
Socialization has been an important focus of research in child development for well over 60 years. Initially, researchers focused on particular child-rearing
practices—including types of discipline and approaches
to toilet training and weaning —in an effort to link specific parenting practices to aspects of the child’s development. Findings from this research were inconsistent
and not especially informative. Over time, such efforts
gave way to research that emphasized the overall emotional climate of the parent-child relationship, instead of
discrete parenting practices.
A number of studies conducted during the past 30
years have pointed to two overarching dimensions of the
parent-child relationship that appear to be systematically
linked to the child’s psychological development: how responsive the parents are, and how demanding they are.
Responsive parents are warm and accepting toward their
children, enjoying them and trying to see things from their
perspective. In contrast, parents who are low in responsiveness tend to be aloof, rejecting, or critical. They show
little pleasure in their children and are often insensitive to
their emotional needs. Demanding parents maintain consistent standards for their child’s behavior. In contrast,
parents who are insufficiently demanding are too lenient;
they exercise minimal control, provide little guidance, and
often yield to their child’s demands. Children’s healthy
psychological development is facilitated when the parents
are both responsive and moderately demanding.
During toddlerhood, children often begin to assert
their desire for autonomy by challenging their parents.
Sometimes, the child’s newfound assertiveness during
the “terrible twos” can put a strain on the parent-child relationship. It is important that parents recognize that this
behavior is normal for the toddler, and that the healthy
development of independence is facilitated by a parentchild relationship that provides support and structure for
the child’s developing sense of autonomy. In many regards, the security of the initial attachment between in-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Parent-child relationships

Involving children in leisure activities, like fishing, can build stronger parent-child relationships. (Photo by Susan D. Rock.
Reproduced with permission.)

fant and parent provides the child with the emotional
wherewithal to begin exploring the world outside the
parent-child relationship.

Preschool
Many researchers study the ways in which responsiveness and demandingness interact to form a general
tone, or climate, in the household. Using this sort of approach, experts have identified four main parenting
styles that typically emerge during the preschool years:
authoritative, authoritarian, indulgent, and disengaged.
Although no parent is absolutely consistent across situations and over time, parents do seem to follow some general tendencies in their approach to childrearing, and it is
possible to describe a parent-child relationship in terms
of the prevailing style of parenting employed. These descriptions can be used to provide guidelines for both professionals and parents interested in understanding how
variations in the parent-child relationship affect the
child’s development.
Authoritative parents are both responsive and demanding; they are firm, but they discipline with love and

affection, rather than power, and they are likely to explain rules and expectations to their children instead of
simply asserting them. Authoritarian parents are also
highly demanding, but they are not less responsive; authoritarian parents tend to be strict disciplinarians, frequently relying on physical punishment and the withdrawal of affection to shape their child’s behavior. Indulgent parents are responsive, but not especially demanding; they have few expectations of their children and
impose little discipline. Disengaged parents are neither
responsive nor demanding. They may be neglectful or
unaware of the child’s needs for affection and discipline.
What makes a parent more likely to use one style as
opposed to another? Ultimately, the parenting style a parent employs is shaped by many factors: the parent’s developmental history, education, and personality, the child’s
behavior, and the immediate and broader context of the
parent’s life. Thus, the parent’s behavior vis-à-vis the child
is influenced by such things as work, marriage, family finances, and other factors likely to affect the parent’s behavior and psychological well-being. In addition, systematic comparisons of parenting practices among families
living in different circumstances teach us that parents in

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

475

Parent-child relationships

different cultures, from different social classes, and from
different ethnic groups rear their children differently.
Nevertheless, research has shown that aspects of
children’s behavior and psychological development are
linked to the style of parenting with which they have
been raised. Generally speaking, preschoolers with authoritative parents tend to be curious about new situations, focused and skilled at play, self-reliant, self-controlled, and cheerful. Children who are routinely treated
in an authoritarian way tend to be moody, unhappy, fearful, withdrawn, unspontaneous, and irritable. Children of
permissive parents tend to be low in both social responsibility and independence, but they are usually more
cheerful than the conflicted and irritable children of authoritarian parents. Finally, children whose parents are
disengaged tend to have a higher proportion of psychological difficulties than other youngsters.

School age
During the elementary school years, the child becomes increasingly interested in peers, but this should
not be taken as a sign of disinterest in the parent-child
relationship. Rather, with the natural broadening of psychosocial and cognitive abilities, the child’s social world
expands to include more people and settings beyond the
home environment. The parent-child relationship continues to remain the most important influence on the
child’s development. Generally speaking, children
whose parents are both responsive and demanding continue to thrive psychologically and socially during the
middle childhood years.
The parenting styles that first become apparent during the preschool years continue to influence development across middle childhood. Over the course of childhood, parents’ styles tend to remain the same, and their
effects on the child quite similar. Children of authoritative parents tend to be socially competent, responsible,
successful in school, and high in self-esteem. The authoritarian style, with its perfectionism, rigidity, and
harsh discipline, continues to affect children adversely,
with these youngsters generally rated lower than their
peers in appropriate social assertiveness, cognitive ability, competence, and self-esteem, but higher in aggression. Children of permissive parents also tend to be more
aggressive than their peers, but also more impulsive, less
self-reliant, and less responsible. Children raised in disengaged homes continue to have the most difficulty, and
show more behavior problems.
The natural tendency is to think of the parent-child
relationship as a one-way street, with the parent influencing the child. But in actuality the relationship is reciprocal and bi-directional. During the school years espe476

cially, the parent-child relationship is influenced not only
by the child’s parents but by the child. In most families,
patterns of interaction between parent and child are well
established by the elementary school years. Overly harsh
parenting, for example, often leads to aggressive behavior in children, leading children to join antisocial peer
groups, further heightening their aggressiveness. This, in
turn, may provoke harsher parenting, leading to further
aggressiveness in the child, and so on. Authoritative parenting, in contrast, helps children develop self-reliance
and social competence, which, of course, makes it easier
for parents to rear their child in an authoritative, reasoned fashion. Continued authoritativeness on the part of
the parent contributes to increased competence in the
child, and so on. Rather than trying to solve the “which
came first” puzzle—the parenting or the child’s characteristics—it is more useful to think of parenting as a
process and the parent-child relationship as one part of
an intricate social system.
Much research has examined how the child’s development is affected by such factors as divorce, remarriage,
and parental (especially, maternal) employment. As a rule,
these studies show that the quality of the parent-child relationship is a more important influence on the child’s psychological development than changes in the structure or
composition of the household. Generally speaking, parenting that is responsive and demanding is associated with
healthier child development regardless of the parent’s
marital status or employment situation. If changes in the
parent’s marital status or work life disrupt the parent-child
relationship, however, short-term effects on the child’s behavior are likely to be seen. One goal of professionals who
work with families under stress is to help them re-establish healthy patterns of parent-child interaction.

Adolescence
Early adolescence marks an important turning point
in the parent-child relationship. As the child enters adolescence, the biological, cognitive, and emotional
changes of the period spark transformations in the parent-child relationship. In many families, the transition
into adolescence coincides with the parent’s transition
into mid-life, and this, too, may introduce additional
challenges into the family system that spill over into the
parent-child relationship.
Early adolescence is a time during which the child’s
urges for independence may challenge parents’ authority,
as the young adolescent strives to establish a sense of
emotional autonomy, or individuation. And much like
toddlerhood, many parents find early adolescence to be a
difficult period requiring a fair amount of adaptation.
But, as is also the case with toddlerhood, research shows

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Although the significance of peer relationships
grows during adolescence, the parent-child relationship
maintains its importance for the psychological development of the child. As in previous eras, authoritative parenting—parenting that combines warmth and firmness—
seems to have the most positive impact on the youngster’s development. Research shows that over time, adolescents who have been reared authoritatively continue to
show more success in school, better psychological development, and fewer behavior problems than their counterparts from other types of homes. Youngsters whose parents are disengaged continue to show the most difficulty.
It is widely assumed that conflict between parents
and children is an inherent feature of family life in adolescence, but systematic research on the so-called “generation gap” indicates that the phenomenon has been exaggerated in the popular media. Early adolescence may
be a time of heightened bickering and somewhat diminished closeness in the parent-child relationship, but most
disagreements between parents and young teenagers are
over fairly mundane matters, and most teenagers and
parents agree on the essentials. Nevertheless, the increased frequency with which these squabbles occur
may take its toll on parents’ mental health, especially on
the mothers’. This period appears to be temporary, however, and most parents and adolescents are able to establish a comfortable working relationship by the beginning
of high school. Indeed, by late adolescence most children report feeling as close to their parents as they did
during elementary school.

Further Reading
Bornstein, M., ed. Handbook of Parenting. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1995.

Parkinson’s disease
A relatively common degenerative disorder of the
central nervous system.

Parkinson’s disease is a degenerative disorder of the
central nervous system named for James Parkinson
(1755-1824), the physician who first described it in
1817. This disorder is also called paralysis agitans, shaking palsy, or parkinsonism.
Typically, the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease
begin to appear in late middle life, and the course of the
disease is slowly progressive over 20 years or more. In
its advanced stages, Parkinson’s disease is characterized
by poorly articulated speech, difficulty in chewing and
swallowing, loss of motor coordination, a general tendency toward exhaustion, and especially by stooped posture, positioning the arms in front of the body when
walking, caution and slowness of movement, rigidity of
facial expression, and tremor of the hands. Mental ability and the senses are not directly affected by this disease.
Parkinson’s disease is believed to be caused by a deficiency of dopamine in the basal ganglia of the brain.
Further Reading
McGoon, Dwight. The Parkinson’s Handbook. New York: Norton, 1990.

Adults
Many adults maintain an active relationship with
their parents. As adults, they can now relate to each other
as equals, although the feeling of one being the parent
and the other a “child” (even though the child is now an
adult) endures in some relationships. Increasingly, adult
children are sandwiched between the demands of caring
for their own children and their aging parents, who may
need more assistance as they get older and physically
weaker. In some families, the adult children take care of
their parents, much in the same way that their parents
took care of them when they were younger. This situation has brought both stress and joy as parents and adult
children struggle to redefine their relationship.
Laurence Steinberg Ph.D.

Parkinson’s disease seen at cellular level. Scientists believe
that nerve cells in the brain fail to get enough dopamine.
(Teri J. McDermott. Custom Medical Stock Photo. Reproduced
with permission.)

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

477

Parkinson’s disease

that most families are able to cope with these adaptational demands successfully. Adolescents fare best, and their
family relationships are happiest, in households in which
parents are both supportive and are accepting of the
child’s needs for more psychological independence.

Passive-aggressive personality

Passive-aggressive personality
A pattern of behavior formerly classified as a personality disorder.

Formerly listed among the personality disorders in
the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, the passive-aggressive personality type has been described by a number of psychologists and psychiatrists, including Karen
Horney, Karl Menninger, and Wilhelm Reich (18971957). Its main distinguishing feature is indirect resistance to the demands or expectations of others through
stubbornness, forgetfulness, inefficiency, procrastination,
and other covert means. Rather than refusing outright to
perform a task, the passive-aggressive person will do it
badly or procrastinate until the deadline for its completion has passed. Passive-aggressive people, at one time
called “ill-tempered depressives,” are also generally
moody, discontented, and critical of others, and they tend
to see themselves as victims, feeling that they are singled
out for bad luck and ill treatment by others. In their interpersonal relationships, they are unable to find a healthy
balance between dependence and assertiveness.
Passive aggression also refers more generally to a
type of behavior not limited to a certain personality type
and characterized by the covert expression of aggressive
feelings one is unable or unwilling to express directly.
Passive aggression may be expressed in a variety of
ways, including tardiness for an event or job about which
one has negative feelings or poor performance of a task
one resents.
Further Reading
Cicchetti, Dante, and Donald J. Cohen (eds.) Developmental
Psychopathology. New York: J. Wiley, 1995.
Eysenck, Michael W. Individual Differences: Normal and Abnormal. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum Associates, 1994.

Ivan Pavlov
1849-1936
Russian physiologist and Nobel laureate best
known for his development of the concept of the
conditioned reflex, or conditioned response.

Ivan Pavlov was born into an impoverished family
in the rural village of Ryazan, Russia. He won a government scholarship to the University of St. Petersburg and
studied medicine at the Imperial Medical Academy, receiving his degree in 1883. In 1890, Pavlov was appointed to a professorship at the St. Petersburg Military Acad478

emy and a few years later joined the faculty of the University of St. Petersburg. He organized the Institute of
Experimental Medicine in 1895, which was to be his research laboratory for the next 40 years.
In the 1890s, Pavlov investigated the workings of
the digestive system—focusing on digestive secretions—
using special surgically created openings in the digestive
tracts of dogs, a project strongly influenced by the work
of an earlier physiologist, Ivan Sechenov (1829-1905).
As a result of this research, Pavlov was awarded the
Nobel Prize for Physiology and Medicine in 1904. During his investigations in this area, Pavlov observed that
normal, healthy dogs would salivate upon seeing their
keeper, apparently in anticipation of being fed. This led
him, through a systematic series of experiments, to formulate the principles of the conditioned response,
which he believed could be applied to humans as well as
to animals. According to Pavlov’s system, an unconditioned stimulus, such as offering food to a dog, produced
a response, or unconditioned reflex, that required no
training (salivation). In contrast, a normally neutral act,
such as ringing a bell, became a conditioned stimulus
when associated with the offering of food and eventually
would produce salivation also, but as a conditioned reflex. According to Pavlov, the conditioned reflex was a
physiological phenomenon caused by the creation of
new reflexive pathways created in the cortex of the brain
by the conditioning process. In further studies of the
cortex, Pavlov posited the presence of two important
processes that accompany conditioning: excitation,
which leads to the acquisition of conditioned responses,
and inhibition, which suppresses them. He eventually
came to believe that cortical inhibition was an important
factor in the sleep process.
Pavlov continued working with conditioned reflexes
throughout the early decades of the twentieth century,
generating several addition principles through further experimentation. The principle of timing dictated that the
neutral stimulus must precede the unconditioned reflex
in order to become a conditioned stimulus. (In other
words, a buzzer would have to go off before food was offered to a dog in order for the dog to associate the food
and buzzer with each other). The concept of extinction
referred to the fact that a conditioned response could be
“unlearned” if the neutral stimulus (buzzer) was repeatedly used without reinforcement (food). Generalization
was the name given to the observation that a stimulus
similar to the conditioned stimulus would still produce a
response as the dog generalized from its original experience to a similar one, but the response would be less pronounced in proportion to the difference between the
stimuli. Finally, testing the limits of the dogs’ ability to
differentiate among stimuli led, unexpectedly, to experi-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Pedophilia
Ivan Pavlov (right of center) with his staff and one of his laboratory dogs. (The Bettmann Archive. Reproduced with permission.)

mental neuroses, similar to mental breakdowns in humans, when the subjects were forced to confront conflicting or ambiguous stimuli for any length of time. Observing the ways in which neurotic symptoms differed
among test subjects led Pavlov between 1916 and 1936
to formulate a theory of four different types of temperament linked to physiological differences based on differences in excitatory and inhibitory activity. Attempting to
extend the implications of this theory to human psychopathology, Pavlov helped establish the Soviet
Union’s continuing tradition of organically-based psychiatric treatment.
Pavlov, who died of pneumonia in 1936, tried to
apply his ideas to psychiatry, and was influential enough
to be considered one of the founders of Russian psychiatry, and he remains a dominant figure in Russian psychology. Although he never considered himself a psychologist, Pavlov’s ultimate belief in conditioning as the
fundamental unit of learning in humans and animals provided one of the cornerstones of the behaviorist school
of psychology in the United States. It is ironic that, although Pavlov was a staunch critic of communism, in the
late 1920s Joseph Stalin (1879-1953) chose Pavlov’s

work as the basis for a new Soviet psychology. Pavlov’s
books include Lectures on the Work of the Principal Digestive Glands (1897), Lectures on Conditioned Reflexes
(1928), and Conditioned Reflexes and Psychiatry (1941).
See also Behaviorism
Further Reading
Babkin, Boris P. Pavlov: A Biography. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1949.

Pedophilia
The recurrent, intense presence of sexual urges and
fantasies of at least six months’ duration, involving
sexual activity with prepubescent children.

Assessment
Pedophilia is a subcategory of a larger group of sexual disorders commonly classified as paraphilias. These
are defined as recurrent, intense, aphrodisiac fantasies,
sexual urges, or behaviors, over a period of at least six

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

479

Pedophilia

months, which involve non-human objects, the suffering
or humiliation of oneself or one’s partner, or children or
other non-consenting partners. If these recurrent fantasies, urges, and behaviors involve sexual activities with
prepubescent children (generally age 13 or younger), the
main diagnostic criterion for pedophilia is met.
Pedophilia encompasses simple voyeurism of nude
children, observing children at various stages of undress
or assisting them to undress, sexual fondling, exposing
oneself, performing oral sex on children and/or requesting them to return oral sex, or mutual masturbation. In
most cases (except those involving incest), pedophiles
do not require sexual penetration, and do not force their
attentions on a child. They instead rely on guile, persuasion, and friendship, often displaying great tenderness
and affection toward the child of their desire. Once a person has engaged in sexual activity with a child, he or she
is then additionally labeled a “child molester.” Thus,
child molestation is subsumed in the overall condition of
pedophilia.
A psychological profile of pedophilia escapes development because perpetrators appear to constitute a heterogenous group. However, some common characteristics prevail among both pedophiles and child molesters.
The great majority of pedophiles are male, and they may
be heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual in orientation.
Preference for children as sex partners may not be exclusive, and more often than not, pedophiles have no gender
preference in prepubescent children. However, by a margin greater than two to one, most victims are girls. Moreover, the pedophile is usually a relative, friend, or neighbor of the child’s family. Alcohol is associated with almost 50 percent of molestation cases, but is not necessarily correlated with pedophilia in general. Pedophilia
tends to be a chronic condition, and recidivism is high.
The motives for engaging in sexual activity with
children are rather divergent among pedophiles, but one
theme recurs: the pedophile tends to justify his/her conduct. Pedophiles often indicate to authorities that the
child solicited sexual contact or activity, and also claim
that the child derives as much sexual pleasure from the
activity as the perpetrator. Pedophiles also excuse their
behavior as non-harmful, non-violent, non-forced, even
“educational” for the child. They often tend not to see
themselves as abusers, molesters, or sexually deviant.
This quality of being into denial as to the true harm that
they may cause belies the fact that clearly, most pedophiles act for their own gratification and not that of the
child. In fact, more often than not, they describe their
urges as compulsive, non-controllable and overwhelming.
The pedophilic disposition may not manifest until
later in life, but more often than not, manifests in adoles480

cence. By definition, it requires a minimum of five
years’ age between the perpetrator and the child in order
to be classified as pedophilia. The disorder is more common in those who have been sexually abused in their
own childhoods. In that subcategory of persons, the perpetrators choose victims in accordance with their own
ages at the time of their experiences.
Pedophiles describe themselves as introverted, shy,
sensitive, and depressed. Objective personality test results tend to confirm these subjective assessments, with
the addition traits of emotional immaturity and a fear of
being able to function in mature adult heterosexual relationships. A common characteristic of pedophiles is a
moralistic sexual attitude or sexual repression.
Accurate diagnostic studies of prevalence among
populations are unreliable for two reasons. First, the tendency may remain latent and undiagnosible unless the
person voluntarily seeks counseling or help. Often the
condition is masked by feigned responses to diagnostic
criteria. Second, there is even among professionals a
wide variance in definitional criteria and identification of
this disorder.
There are two major professional tools employed to
assess and diagnose pedophilia. The first is through phallometric testing (also referred to as penile plethysmographic assessment, or PPG), which measures changes in
penile blood volume occurring simultaneously with the
presentation of varying erotic stimuli. There has been
some criticism of the reliability of this test because physiological changes are easier to measure than interpret.
Second, arousal also may be a function of general arousability rather than of specific stimuli. To address this, researchers have developed a second diagnostic tool as a
central arousability system intended to work adjunctly
with PPG. The contingent negative variation (CNV) system measures brain waves as putative indices of sexual
desire under conditions of sexual stimulation relevant to
pedophilic arousal.

Treatment
Behavioral treatment of pedophilia does not affect
recidivism, nor apparently does incarceration. The condition remains chronic, and for this reason, societal interest in incarceration prevails over what is generally seen
as equivocal behavior treatment.
Although most practitioners believe that the etiology
of pedophilia is psychologically oriented, a report published in the Journal of Neuro Psychiatry and Clinical
Neuroscience suggested that bilateral anterior temporal
disease, affecting more right than left temporal lobe, could
increase sexual interest. The authors’ study was limited to
two adult professional patients with late-life homosexual

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In late 1999, Israeli researchers published a report
on the discovery of the drug triptorelin as an effective
treatment for males sex offenders in general. The drug
regulates the production of testosterone. Of interest is
that it can be injected once a month, compared to other
similar anti-androgen drugs, which must be administered
more often and have more serious side effects.

Current trends
The effective diagnosis and treatment of pedophilia
is threatened by three key developments going into the
new century. The 1994 (Fourth) edition of the professional therapists’ bible, the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV), adds another
(controversial) criterion for diagnosing pedophilia. It includes, in its diagnostic definitional criteria, that the fantasies, urges, or behaviors “…cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in social, occupational, or other
important areas of functioning.” This latest definitional
criterion has met with considerable resistance, due to the
fact that so many pedophiles deny that their conduct is
harmful. The denial serves to assuage any guilt, and
therefore may significantly mask or otherwise repress
any distress or impairment on the part of the perpetrator.
Secondly, there has been marked pervasiveness and
proliferation of child pornographic materials on the Internet and international websites. In a 1998 Interpol raid
(the latest data available), a total of 500,000 child pornographic images were found on computers in the United
States alone. According to one study, as much as 45 percent of child pornography on the Internet comes from
Japan, where child pornography is not an offense. The
second largest concentration of child pornographic sites
come from Russia. The United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), in cooperation with the Interpol, continue to police global websites and shut down operations.
Another area of controversy was the late 1998
American Psychological Association’s publication of a
study entitled, “A MetaAnalytic Examination of Assumed Properties of Child Sexual Abuse Using College
Samples.” The study’s authors advised practitioners not
to assume that sexual activity between non-related adults
and children was harmful. The study, which was limited
to interviews with college students, further posited that if
the involved child/victim consented to the sexual activity, little or no harm was done to the child’s adult life or
personality. Most of the research in the study had not
been subjected to peer review. The study caused an im-

mediate reaction in professional, family, and media entities. On July 12, 1999, the U.S. House of Representatives voted a shut-out 355-0 to condemn the study. As
Representative Dave Weldon (R-Fla.) stated to the press,
“Children are not capable of giving consent to sexual encounters with adults.”
See also Paraphilias
Lauri R. Harding
Further Reading
”A New Treatment for Pedophilia.” Harvard Mental Health
Letter, (October 1999): 7.
D’Agnostino, Joseph. “Pro-Child Advocates Challenge Study
Legitimizing Pedophilia.” American Spectator, (November 1999): 66.
Gahr, Evan. “Psyched Out in Left Field.” American Spectator,
(November 1999): 66.
Ivey, Gavin; and Peta Simpson. “The Psychological Life of
Paedophiles: A Phenomenological Study.” South African
Journal of Psychology, (March 1998): 15.
Martin, Ann-Louise. “Paedophilia Online, Off Limits!” UNESCO Sources, (February 1999): 21.
Murray, John B. “Psychological Profile of Pedophiles and
Child Molesters.” Journal of Psychology Interdisciplinary
& Applied, (March 2000): 211.
Repique, RJR. “Assessment & Treatment of Persons with Pedophilia.” Journal of Psychosocial Nursing and Mental
Health Services, (December 1999).
Tavris, Carol. “The Uproar Over Sexual Abuse Research and
Its Findings.” Society, (May/June 2000): 15.

Peer acceptance
The degree to which a child or adolescent is socially accepted by peers; the level of peer popularity.

Peer acceptance is measured by the quality rather
than the quantity of a child or adolescent’s relationships.
While the number of friends varies among children and
over time as a child develops, peer acceptance is often established as early as preschool. Factors such as physical
attractiveness, cultural traits, and disabilities affect the
level of peer acceptance, with a child’s degree of social
competence being the best predictor of peer acceptance.
Children who are peer-accepted or popular have fewer
problems in middle and high school, and teens who are
peer-accepted have fewer emotional and social adjustment problems as adults. Peer-accepted children may be
shy or assertive, but they often have well-developed communication skills. Peer-accepted children tend to:

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

481

Peer acceptance

pedophilia. Therefore, further observation and research is
necessary to assess diagnostic and treatment implications
for all neurologically based paraphilias.

Peer mediation

• Correctly interpret other children’s body language and
tone of voice. Well-liked children can distinguish subtleties in emotions. For example, they can distinguish
between anger directed toward them versus toward a
parent.
• Directly respond to the statements and gestures of other
children. Well-liked children will say other children’s
names, establish eye contact, and use touch to get attention.
• Give reasons for their own statements and gestures (actions). For example, well-liked children will explain
why they want to do something the other child does not
want to do.
• Cooperate with, show tact towards, and compromise
with other children, demonstrating the willingness to
subordinate the self by modifying behavior and opinions in the interests of others. For example, when joining a new group where a conversation is already in
progress, well-liked children will listen first, establishing a tentative presence in the group before speaking
(even if it is to change the subject).
These skills are crucial in initiating and maintaining
relationships, and in resolving conflicts. By contrast, rejected children tend either towards aggressive, antisocial
behavior, or withdrawn, depressive behavior. They also
don’t listen well, tend not to offer reasons for their behavior, don’t positively reinforce their peers, and have
trouble cooperating. Antisocial children will interrupt
people, dominate other children, and either verbally or
physically attack them. Depressive or withdrawn children may be excessively reserved, submissive, anxious,
and inhibited. Competitiveness or dominance by itself is
not necessarily indicative of low peer acceptance. In fact,
popular children tend to have the characteristics of both
competitiveness and friendliness.
Although biological predisposition may be a factor
in a child’s social competence and level of peer acceptance, environmental factors are also extremely important. Some of the factors contributing to peer acceptance
include (1) during infancy, the quality of attachment
between mother or primary caregiver and child; (2) during childhood, the quantity and quality of opportunities
for interaction with different types of peers in different
environments (in the family, at school, church, camp, activity centers, in sports, or in the neighborhood); (3) the
type of parenting style. A highly nurturant but moderately controlling “authoritative” parenting style is associated with the highest levels of social competence. By contrast, a low nurturant, highly controlling “authoritarian”
parenting style is associated with children’s aggressiveness, while the high nurturant but low-controlling “permissive” style is associated with failure to take responsibility for behavior.
482

Children learn to relate to peers by engaging in peer
relationships. Often a vicious circle develops where a rejected child is given fewer and fewer opportunities by his
peers to relate and thereby learn new skills. Lack of opportunity to participate normally in peer interaction is especially problematic for children who differ in some obvious way, either culturally, racially, or through some
mental or physical disability. Issues of peer acceptance
should be addressed as early as possible in order to prevent loss of self-confidence and self-esteem.
In addition to providing direct social skills training
or counseling for the child with peer acceptance problems, parents and teachers can create opportunities for
non-threatening social interaction to occur. Though children should never be forced to play together (this can
create the rejection it is intended to remedy), popular and
less-popular preschoolers can be encouraged to interact
with one another. For example, a less sociable child may
be encouraged to answer and ask questions of others.
Older children should be provided opportunities to interact in smaller groups and in one-on-one situations,
where it may be easier to try out new behaviors and
make up for social mistakes. Shy or withdrawn children
can be encouraged to develop outside interests that will
place them in structured contact with others. In school,
peer helping programs and collaborative learning provide opportunities for popular and less-popular children
to work together. Ideally, collaboration should highlight
the less-popular students’ strengths, such as special interests and talents, rather than weaknesses. At any age, the
smallest positive change in behavior should be reinforced with attention and praise.
Further Reading
Asher, S. R., and J. D. Coie, eds. Peer Rejection in Childhood.
New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Goleman, Daniel. Emotional Intelligence. New York: Bantam
Books, 1995.
Ramsey, P.G. Making Friends in School: Promoting Peer Relationships in Early Childhood. New York: Teacher’s College Press, 1991.
Selman, R. The Growth of Interpersonal Understanding. New
York: Academic Press, 1980.

Peer mediation
A process by which students act as mediators to resolve disputes among themselves. A form of conflict
resolution used to address student disagreements
and low-level disciplinary problems in schools.

Peer mediation is a form of conflict resolution
based on integrative negotiation and mediation. Disput-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Purposes of peer mediation
In accordance with the principles of conflict resolution, peer mediation programs start with the assumption
that conflict is a natural part of life that should neither be
avoided nor allowed to escalate into verbal or physical
violence. Equally important is the idea that children and
adolescents need a venue in which they are allowed to
practically apply the conflict resolution skills they are
taught. Peer mediation programs vary widely in their
scope and function within a school or system. In some
schools, mediation is offered as an alternative to traditional disciplinary measures for low-level disruptive behavior. For example, students who swear at each other or
initiate fights might agree to participate in mediation
rather than being referred to the playground supervisor
or principal. In other schools, mediation takes place in
addition to disciplinary measures. In either case, peer
mediation is intended to prevent the escalation of conflict. Serious violations of rules or violent attacks are not
usually addressed through mediation.
Although peer mediation is primarily carried out by
students, at least a few staff members and teachers are
actively involved in training and facilitation. Ideally, peer
mediation will encourage a culture of open communication and peaceful solutions to conflict. According to the
NAME, five of the most common purposes of a school
mediation program are:
1. to increase communication among students,
teachers, administrators, and parents.

PEER MEDIATION PROCESS
The process varies, but most programs use the following general format:
I. Introduction—The mediator introduces him or
herself and explains the rules. The mediator tries to
make the disputants feel comfortable.
II. Identifying the Problem—The mediator listens to
each party describe the problem and writes down an
agreed-upon “agenda” that includes all the elements of
a dispute.
III. Identifying Facts and Feelings—The disputants
tell their sides of the story to each other. The goal is to
“surface” all of the underlying facts and feelings pertaining to the problem. The mediator asks many questions with the goal of helping to refocus the problem by
viewing it differently.
IV. Generating Options—The mediator asks both
parties to brainstorm how they might solve the problem.
The mediator writes down all the solutions, marking the
ones that are mutually agreed upon. If none are forthcoming, participants return to previous steps. Sometimes, individual sessions with each disputant and the
mediator are necessary.
V. Agreement—The mediator writes a contract
using the solutions to which both parties agree, and
everyone signs it.
VI. Follow-Up—After a period of time the former
disputants will report back to the mediator on whether
the contract is being upheld by both parties.

2. to reduce school violence, vandalism, and suspensions.
3. to encourage children, adolescents, and teens to
resolve their own disputes by developing listening, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills.
4. to teach peaceful resolution of differences, a skill
needed to live in a multicultural world.
5. to motivate students’ interest in conflict resolution, justice, and the American legal system, and encourage active citizenship.

Training of peer mediators
Programs vary in whether they train all the students in
the school to act as mediators, or only as a “cadre” of selected students. The cadre approach may be used initially
with the intention of expanding later. Mediators either volunteer or are nominated by teachers or other students;

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

483

Peer mediation

ing parties converse with the goal of finding a mutually
satisfying solution to their disagreement, and a neutral
third party facilitates the resolution process. The salient
feature of peer mediation as opposed to traditional discipline measures and other forms of conflict resolution is
that, outside of the initial training and ongoing support
services for students, the mediation process is entirely
carried out by students and for students. Due to the rise
of violence in schools, the sharp increase in serious
crime committed by youths, and the increasing awareness of the need for social skills instruction in education,
peer mediation programs exploded in the 1980s. In 1984,
when the National Association for Mediation in Education (NAME) was formed, there were about 50 mediation programs in school districts nationwide. Eleven
years later NAME reported over 5,000 programs across
the country. Peer mediation programs that have gained
national stature include the early Educators for Social
Responsibility program, San Francisco’s Community
Board program, New York’s School Mediators Alternative Resolution Team (SMART), and New Mexico’s
Center for Dispute Resolution.

Peer mediation

often, students who are “troublemakers” turn out to be the
best mediators. Many programs have a required conflict
resolution course sometime during the middle school
years. Training is done by teachers, counseling staff, or
outside consultants, and ranges from the semester-long
course (15-20 hours of training), to a two-day workshop
for middle or high school students, to a three-hour workshop for elementary students. Through discussion and role
play, students learn conflict resolution skills such as active
listening, cooperation in achieving a goal, acceptance of
differences, problem-solving, anger management, and
methods of maintaining neutrality as a mediator. They
also practice the structured mediation process they will be
following in actual dispute resolution.

The mediation session
Elementary mediators usually work in teams, visiting designated school areas and responding to signs of
antagonism between students as they arise. They will approach the disputants, ask if they need help, and take
them aside for mediation, if the students agree. Middle
and high school programs may employ resident mediators in the cafeteria or public areas, using a more formal
procedure for students to refer themselves or others for
mediation. There is usually a separate mediation room or
rooms set up to facilitate private communication among
the disputants and the mediator.
It is essential that disputants voluntarily agree to
participate in mediation, and ground rules for the process
prohibit name-calling or interrupting someone who is
talking.

Success of peer mediation programs
It is difficult to measure the success of peer mediation programs. Almost all teachers and administrators
report that their programs are extremely successful, and
that they perceive a more positive climate and see less
destructive behavior in the school. When measuring
success in reaching or maintaining agreement between
disputants, rates vary between 58-93%. A few studies
show reductions in suspension rates, suspension rates
for fighting, or incidence of fighting by as much as
50%. Even elementary students learn and retain the
knowledge of conflict resolution techniques, and those
who participate in mediation, either as mediators or as
disputants, benefit from the experience. The NAME
found that peer mediation programs reduce the amount
of teacher and administrator time spent on discipline,
reduce violence and crime in schools, and increase the
self-esteem and academic achievement of students
trained as mediators.
484

One critical factor in the success of peer mediation
programs is the active support of the school principal,
and in some cases of the local community. A comprehensive planning process is necessary to outline goals and
administrative accountability for each phase of the program. Provision for the ongoing support of the peer mediators is especially important. At minimum, a weekly
meeting should be held for the students to debrief, engage in guided reflection, and receive continued training.
One of the reasons for the success of peer mediation
is the fact that it is student run. Children and adolescents
build a culture of positive peer pressure within which
they can begin to establish independence from adult
guidance. When given the opportunity, they are capable
of using their own judgment to creatively solve disputes,
and often their solutions are less punitive than those of
adults. Research shows that children’s solutions to conflict are more aggressive when adults are present. As
children grow older they rely increasingly on their peers
as models and measures of correct behavior. The potential judgment of peers during the mediation process may
have a higher degree of moral significance to a teen than
would the same judgment coming from an adult. In peer
mediation, students have the opportunity to conform to
positive social standards without sacrificing their identification with the peer group.
See also Conflict resolution
Further Reading
Ferrara, Judith M. Peer Mediation: Finding a Way to Care.
York, ME: Stenhouse Publishing, 1996.
Robertson, Gwendolyn. School-Based Peer Mediation Programs: A Natural Extension of Developmental Guidance
Programs. Gorham, ME: University of Southern Maine,
1991.
Sorenson, Don L. Conflict Resolution and Mediation for Peer
Helpers. Minneapolis, MN: Educational Media Corporation, 1992.
Wolowiec, Jack, ed. Everybody Wins: Mediation in the
Schools, Chicago: American Bar Association, 1994.

Further Information
American Bar Association. Special Committee on Dispute
Resolution, 1800 M Street, NW, Washington, DC 20036.
Educators for Social Responsibility. 475 Riverside Drive,
Room 450, New York, NY 10115.
National Association for Mediation in Education (NAME). 205
Hampshire House, Box 33635, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003–3635, (413) 545–2462.
School Initiatives Program. Community Board Center for Policy and Training, 149 Ninth Street, San Francisco, CA
94103.
School Mediation Associates. 702 Green Street #8, Cambridge,
MA 02139.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The influence of the social group on an individual.

Peers are the individuals with whom a child or adolescent identifies, who are usually but not always of the
same age-group. Peer pressure occurs when the individual experiences implicit or explicit persuasion, sometimes amounting to coercion, to adopt similar values, beliefs, and goals, or to participate in the same activities as
those in the peer group.
Although it is usually conceived of as primarily a
negative influence acting on adolescents or teens, peer
pressure can be a positive influence as well, and it can
act on children at any age, depending on their level of
contact with others. The influence of peer pressure is
usually addressed in relation to the relative influence of
the family on an individual. Some characteristics that
peer groups offer and which families may be lacking are:
(1) a strong belief structure; (2) a clear system of rules;
and (3) communication and discussion about taboo subjects such as drugs, sex, and religion.
Peer pressure is strongly associated with level of
academic success, drug and substance use, and gender
role conformity. The level of peer influence increases
with age, and resistance to peer influence often declines
as the child gains independence from the family or caretakers, yet has not fully formed an autonomous identity.
One study in particular confirms other research findings
that the values of the peer group with whom the high
schooler spends the most time are a stronger factor in the
student’s level of academic success than the values, attitudes, and support provided by the family. Compared to
others who started high school with the same grades, students whose families were not especially supportive but
who spent time with an academically oriented peer
group were successful, while those students whose families stressed academics but who spent time with peers
whose orientation was not academic performed less well.
The peer pressure study contradicts prevailing ideas
about the influence of families on the success of racial
and cultural minorities such as Asians and African Americans. While some Asian families were not especially involved in their children’s education, the students, who
found little social support of any type, tended to band together in academic study groups. Conversely, African
American students, whose families tended to be highly
involved in and supportive of education, were subjected
to intense peer pressure not to perform academically. According to the study, the African American peer groups
associated the activities of studying and spending time at
the library with “white” behavior, and adopted the idea

Peer pressure similarly compels students of all ethnic
backgrounds to engage in other at-risk behaviors such as
cigarette smoking, truancy, drug use, sexual activity,
fighting, theft, and daredevil stunts. Again, peer group
values and attitudes influence, more strongly than do
family values, the level of teenage alcohol use. Regardless of the parenting style, peer pressure also influences
the degree to which children, especially girls, conform to
expected gender roles. Up until about grade six, girls’
performance in science and math are on par with that of
boys, but during adolescence girls’ test scores and level
of expressed interest declines. The tendency is to abandon competition with boys in favor of placing more emphasis on relationships and on physical appearance.
Ideally the child, adolescent, or teen should make decisions based on a combination of values internalized
from the family, values derived from thinking independently, and values derived from friends and other role
models. In order to achieve this balance, rather than attempting to minimize peer influence, families and schools
must provide strong alternative beliefs, patterns of behavior, and encourage formation of peer groups that engage in
positive academic, athletic, artistic, and social activities.
Hallie Bourne
Further Reading
Bernard, B. The Case for Peers. Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory, 1990.
Feller, Robyn M. Everything You Need to Know About Peer
Pressure. New York: Rosen Publishing Group, 1995.
Juvonen, Jaana, and Kathryn R. Wentzel, eds. Social Motivation: Understanding Children’s School Adjustment. New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Myrick, R.D. and D.L. Sorenson. Peer Helping: A Practical
Guide. Minneapolis, MN: Educational Media Corporation, 1988.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Wilder Graves Penfield
1891-1976
American-born Canadian neurosurgeon who diagnosed the cause of epilepsy and perfected a surgical cure.
485

Wilder Graves Penfield

Peer pressure

that the student who gets good grades, participates in
school activities, or speaks Standard English is betraying
his racial heritage and community. Consequently, gifted
students “dumb-down” as they make the choice between
academics and “fitting in.” Research suggests that this
type of peer pressure contributes to a decline in the
grades of African American students (especially males)
as early as the first through fourth grades.

Wilder Graves Penfield

Sherrington’s research laboratory at Oxford from 1919
to 1921.
Penfield returned to the United States in 1918 to receive training in general surgery and neurosurgery in New
York City. In 1924 he founded the Laboratory of Neurocytology at Presbyterian Hospital, Columbia University, and
worked there as associate attending surgeon from 1921 to
1928. In 1928 he was appointed neurosurgeon to the
Royal Victoria Hospital and the Montreal General Hospital. It was here that he perfected his surgical operation for
severe epilepsy. He had learned, perfected, and adapted
the many techniques used in this operation from visits to
Europe he had made while at Montreal.
The results of one of these operations in 1931 gave
Penfield the idea to write a general textbook regarding
neurosurgery. Instead of writing it all himself, he decided to ask other specialists in this field to contribute to the
book. The resulting book, Cytology and Cellular Pathology of the Nervous System (1932), turned into a three
volume discussion of neurology. The collaboration that
had produced the book gave Penfield the idea to create
an institute furthered by the same cooperative techniques. He established the Montreal Neurological Institute on this idea and became its first director in 1934,
holding this post until 1960. He was a professor of neurology and neurosurgery at McGill University from 1933
to 1954.

Wilder G. Penfield and his wife. (The Library of Congress.
Reproduced with permission.)

Wilder Graves Penfield was born in Spokane, Washington, on January 26, 1891. He was one of three children
born to Charles Samuel and Jean (Jefferson) Penfield. His
father was a physician and died when Penfield was very
young. To support herself and her family, Penfield’s
mother became a writer and Bible teacher. Penfield spent
his early years at the Galahad School in Hudson, Wisconsin, where his mother worked as a housekeeper.
Upon graduation in 1909, Penfield was accepted at
Princeton University. He was active in extra-curricular
activities and became president of his class. He was so
good at football, that upon graduation in 1913, he was
hired as a coach. After graduation from Princeton with a
degree in literature, Penfield held a Rhodes scholarship
and a Beit Memorial Research fellowship at Oxford University, where he studied with Sir William Osler and Sir
Charles Scott Sherrington. He married Helen Katherine
Kermott in 1917 and eventually raised four children.
Penfield received his medical degree from Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore in 1918. He worked in
486

Penfield became a naturalized Canadian citizen in
1934 and served as a colonel in the Royal Canadian Army
Medical Corps from 1945 to 1946. He headed many
wartime projects including investigating motion sickness,
decompression sickness, and air transportation of persons
with head injuries. Penfield’s wartime experiences supplied two books; Manual of Military Neurosurgery
(1941) and Epilepsy and Cerebral Localization (1941).
After the war he continued his studies on epilepsy
by undertaking a study of the removal of brain scars resulting from birth injuries. He was a fellow of the Royal
Society of London and of the Royal Society of Canada
and received the Order of Merit from Queen Elizabeth
(1953). He also received numerous scientific awards and
lectureships. He helped found the Vanier Institute of the
Family and served as its first president (1965-1968).
After his retirement from the Montreal Neurological
Institute in 1960, Penfield set out on what he called his
“second career” of writing and lecturing around the
world. Not one to take to retirement easily, Penfield said
“…rest is not what the brain needs. Rest destroys the
brain.” He traveled abroad many times during this period
and even lectured in China and Russia.
Penfield published The Difficult Art of Giving, The
Epic of Alan Gregg (1967), a biography of the Rocke-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Medical research
Penfield chose epilepsy as his special interest and
approached the study of brain function through an intensive study of people suffering from this condition. In
choosing this approach, he was influenced by Sherrington and by John Hughlings Jackson, a British neurologist
who viewed epilepsy as “an experiment of nature,”
which may reveal the functional organization of the
human brain. To this study Penfield brought the modern
techniques of neurosurgery—which allow the surgeon to
study the exposed brain of the conscious patient under
local anesthesia—while using electrical methods for
stimulating and recording from the cortex and from
deeper structures. The patient is able to cooperate fully
in describing the results of cortical stimulation. By this
surgical method it is possible in some patients to localize
and remove a brain lesion responsible for epileptic attacks. Penfield used this approach primarily for the treatment of focal epilepsy. His pioneer work yielded impressive results, and his techniques for the surgical treatment
of epilepsy became standard procedure in neurosurgery.

Writings and theories
Penfield’s The Cerebral Cortex of Man (1950) summarizes the results of mapping the principal motor and
sensory areas of the cortex, including the delineation of a
new “supplementary motor area” and a “second sensory
area.” The results of temporal lobe stimulation are described in Epilepsy and the Functional Anatomy of the
Human Brain (1954), and his remarkable observations
on temporal lobe epilepsy are also recorded there. Penfield also defined four areas of the cortex concerned with
human speech function and described them in Speech
and Brain-Mechanisms.
Penfield was convinced that the brain of man—including all cortical areas—is controlled and “organized”
through a group of subcortical centers. These centers lie

within the upper brainstem and include the thalamus.
For this functionally important area he coined the term
“centrencephalon,” and his view may be described as a
“centrencephalic” theory of cerebral organization. In his
view consciousness, self-awareness, depends upon the
integrating action of this subcortical system, which in
some way, as yet unknown, unites the brain into a single
functioning organ. There is much evidence for such a
theory, and Penfield developed it in his Sherrington Lectures, The Excitable Cortex in Conscious Man (1958).
Further Reading
Current Biography Yearbook. New York: H.W. Wilson Co.,
1968. Current Biography Yearbook. New York: H.W. Wilson Co., 1976.
Fulton, John F. and Leonard G. Wilson, eds. Selected readings
in the history of physiology. 1930. 2nd ed. 1966.
Granit, Ragnar. Charles Scott Sherrington: an appraisal. 1967.
Obituary. New York Times. April 6, 1976.
Penfield, Wilder Graves. No man alone: a surgeon’s story. 1977.
Penfield, Wilder Graves. McGraw-Hill modern men of science.
1966.

Perception
The area of psychology associated with the functioning of sensory systems and how information
from the external world is interpreted.

Psychologists have identified two general ways in
which humans perceive their environment. One involves
what is called “top-down” processing. In this mode,
what is perceived depends on such factors as expectations and knowledge. That is, sensory events are interpreted based on a combination of what occurs in the external world and on existing thoughts, experience, and
expectations. When a perception is based on what is expected, it is called a perceptual set, a predisposition to
experience an event in a particular way. One example of
such a predisposition involves hearing potentially disturbing words or phrases when rock music is played
backwards. Although most people will not detect such
words or phrases when they first listen to the backward
sounds (when they do not have a perceptual set), these
same people will hear them quite clearly if they are then
told what to listen for. Psychologists regard this process
as involving a perceptual set because perception of the
distressing message does not occur until the individual is
primed to hear it.
Motivation can also influence the way an event is
perceived. At sporting events, the same episode can be interpreted in exactly opposite ways by fans of two different teams. In this instance, people are interpreting the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

487

Perception

feller Foundation and the director who had approved the
$1.2 million grant for the founding of the Montreal Neurological Institute, during this period. Second Thoughts;
Science, the Arts and the Spirit (1970) and The Mystery
of the Mind: A Critical Study of Conscience and the
Human Brain (1975) were also published as he lectured
around the world. Penfield finished his final work, the
autobiographical No Man Alone: A Surgeons Story, just
three weeks before his death from abdominal cancer in
Montreal’s Royal Victoria Hospital on April 5, 1976.
This work was published posthumously in 1977 and was
a fitting tribute to a man who was remembered by his
friends and colleagues as one who always thought of his
discoveries as just “exciting beginnings.”

Perfectionism

episode with what they regard as an open mind, but their
subjectivity colors their perceptions. The alternate approach is “bottom-up” processing that relies less on what
is already known or expected and more on the nature of
the external stimulus. If there are no preconceived notions
of what to expect, cues present in the stimulus are used to
a greater extent. One part of this process is called feature
analysis, which involves taking the elementary cues in a
situation and attempting to put them together to create a
meaningful stimulus. When children listen to an initially
unfamiliar set of sounds, like the “Pledge of Allegiance,”
they often hear words and phrases that adults (who use
top-down processing) do not hear. Thus, the phrase “one
nation indivisible,” may be heard by a child as “one
naked individual.” The child has heard the correct number
of syllables, some key sounds, and the rhythm of the
phrase, but too many features are unclear, resulting in an
inaccurate perception. In general, many psychologists
have concluded that perceptual abilities rely both on external stimuli and on expectation and knowledge.
Much of the research in perception has involved vision for two general reasons. First, psychologists recognize that these this sense dominates much of human perception and, second, it is easier to study than audition (
hearing) or the minor senses like taste, smell, touch, and
balance. Other perceptual research has investigated the
way people pay attention to the world around them and
learn to ignore information that is irrelevant to their
needs at any given moment.
Within the realm of vision, several areas have especially captured the attention of psychologists: depth
perception, form perception, perceptual constancy, and
perceptual organization. When a visual scene contains
information that includes conflicting information about
depth, form, and organization, the result is a visual illusion, commonly referred to as an optical illusion. Such
illusions can occur when there is too little information
available to generate an accurate interpretation of the
stimulus; when experience leads to the formulation of a
specific interpretation; or when the sensory systems
process information in a consistent, but inaccurate, fashion. Illusions are completely normal, unlike delusions
that may reflect abnormal psychological processes.
Another aspect of perception that psychologists
have studied intensively is attention. Often, people can
selectively attend to different aspects of their world and
tune others out. In a loud, crowded room, for example, a
person can understand a single speaker by turning his or
her attention to the location of the speaker and concentrating on the frequency (pitch) of the speaker’s voice;
the individual can also use the meaning of the conversation to help in concentration and to ignore irrelevant
speech. In some cases, however, we seem incapable of
488

ignoring information. One common example is the
“cocktail party phenomenon.” If something is holding
our attention but an individual within earshot speaks our
name, our attention is quickly diverted to that individual.
When we perceive a stimulus that is important to us (like
our name), our attention switches. One famous example
that involves an inability to ignore information is the
Stroop effect. If words are printed in colored ink, it is
normally an easy task to name the color of the ink. If the
words are color names, however, (e.g., “RED”) that appear in a different ink color (e.g., the word “RED” in
green ink), we have difficulty naming the ink color because we tend to read the word instead of paying attention to the ink color. This process seems entirely automatic in proficient readers.
Research on the perceptual capabilities of young
children is more difficult because of insufficient communication skills. At birth, infants can see objects clearly
only when those objects are about eight inches (20 cm)
from the eye, but distance vision improves within the
first month. Infants also exhibit depth perception and appear to have some color vision. Similarly, infants can detect speech sounds shortly after birth and can locate the
origin of sounds in the environment, as is smell and
taste. Within a few days following birth, breast-fed babies can differentiate their own mother’s milk from that
of another mother, and also prefer odors that adults like
and respond more negatively to the types of odors adults
do not like.
Further Reading
Chapman, Elwood N. Attitude: Your Most Priceless Possession. 2nd ed. Los Altos, CA: Crisp Publications, 1990.
Eiser, J. Richard. Social Psychology: Attitudes, Cognition, and
Social Behaviour. New York: Cambridge University Press,
1986.

Perfectionism
The tendency to set unrealistically high standards
for performance of oneself and others, along with
the inability to accept mistakes or imperfections in
matters of personal appearance, care of the home,
or work; may be accompanied by an obsession
with completeness, purity, or goodness.

Perfectionism is a psychological orientation which,
depending on the severity, may have biological and/or
environmental causes. To an educated observer, a perfectionist orientation is usually evident by the preschool
years, though it may not cause problems until the college
years. The perfectionist orientation has two components:
impossibly high standards, and the behaviors intended to

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Due to obsessive effort and high standards of performance combined with natural gifts, perfectionists may be
athletic, musical, academic, or social achievers, but they
may equally as often be underachievers. Perfectionists
engage in dichotomous thinking, believing that there is
only one right outcome and one way to achieve that outcome. Dichotomous thinking causes indecisiveness, since
according to the individual’s perception a decision, once
made, will be either entirely right or entirely wrong. Due
to their exacting precision, they take an excessive amount
of time to perform tasks. Even small tasks become overwhelming, which leads to frustration, procrastination, and
further anxiety caused by time constraints.
Perfectionists also pay selective attention to their
own achievements, criticizing themselves for mistakes or
failures, and downplaying their successes. Overwhelmed
by anxiety about their future performance, they are unable to enjoy successes.
Perfectionist anxiety can cause headaches, digestive
problems, muscle tension, and heart and vascular problems. Anxiety can also cause “blanking” or temporary
memory losses before events such as musical performances or academic exams. Perfectionists also hesitate
to try new activities for fear of being a beginner at an activity, even for a short period of time. Negative effects of
perfectionism are felt especially when an individual is a
perfectionist in all areas of life, rather than in one realm,
such as an artistic or scientific pursuit, which might
allow room for mistakes in other areas of life.
In extreme forms perfectionism may contribute to
depression or be diagnosed as obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder (which should be distinguished
from the more serious obsessive-compulsive disorder).
The more common syndromes of anorexia nervosa and
bulimia can be considered an extreme form of perfectionism directed towards the body and its appearance.
The irrational distortions of perception that can arise
from abnormally high standards of “performance” (i.e.,
thinness) are evident in the anorexic’s perception of her
or himself as fat.
Perfectionist behavior functions essentially to control events. Conditions that place the person in a position
of vulnerability and/or that require the person to take
extra responsibility for events can contribute to perfectionism. First-born children, children with excessively

critical parents, and children who have lost a parent or
sibling all may be predisposed towards perfectionism.
Further Reading
Adderholdt-Elliott, M.R. Perfectionism: What’s Bad About
Being Too Good. Minneapolis: Free Spirit, 1987.
Mallinger, A.E. and J. DeWyze. Too Perfect: When Being in
Control Gets Out of Control. NY: Random House, 1993.
Manes, S. Be a Perfect Person in Just Three Days. New York:
Bantam/Skylark Books, 1987.
Zadra, D. Mistakes Are Great. Mankato, MN: Creative Education, 1986.

Frederick S. Perls
1893-1970
German-American psychotherapist who co-founded Gestalt therapy.

Frederick S. Perls, known to his friends and colleagues as Fritz, was the co-founder with his wife Laura
(1905-1990) of the Gestalt school of psychotherapy.
Trained as a Freudian, Perls felt that Freud’s ideas had
limitations, in part because they focused on past experiences. One of the key elements of Gestalt therapy is its
focus on what Perls called the “here and now.” During
the 1960s, Gestalt therapy gained a reputation as yet another of the “feel-good” therapeutic techniques then so
common. Today, Gestalt is recognized as one of several
standard approaches (often part of what is called an
“eclectic” approach) to modern therapy.
Perls was born in Berlin in 1893 into a middle class
family. He was a bright student, but his interest in science did not emerge until after he enrolled in college in
1913. Before that he had been interested in the theater.
He toyed briefly with the idea of studying law but settled
on medicine.
The First World War interrupted his college years.
He served until the war ended in 1918, then continued
his medical studies. He received his M.D. in 1921 By
this time he had decided that he wanted to focus on psychiatry. Perls was an admirer and follower of Sigmund
Freud and his psychoanalytic techniques. At the same
time, he was becoming more and more intrigued by
Gestalt psychology.
The English language has no equivalent word for
“Gestalt,” but it is commonly translated as “pattern” or
“form.” Gestalt psychology states, in simplest terms, that
the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. In other
words, in order to understand the various components of
a particular issue or event, one must understand the event
itself and put the components in perspective. In the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

489

Frederick S. Perls

help achieve the standards and avoid mistakes. The high
standards interfere with performance, and perfectionist
behavior becomes an obstacle instead of a means to
achieving the goal. For example, when a five-year-old
who is learning to write repeatedly erases his lines because they are not exactly straight, he is exhibiting a perfectionistic tendency.

Personality

1920s and 1930s, Perls began to move away from the
classic Freudian model and create a more holistic approach to therapy. In the meantime, he continued his education in psychotherapy in Berlin, Vienna, and Frankfurt. While studying in Frankfurt, he met his future wife;
they married in 1930 and later had two children.

Perls later moved to an island off the coast of Vancouver, British Columbia, where in 1970 he started a
training community for Gestalt therapists. In March
1970, shortly after conducting a workshop in Lexington,
Massachusetts, Perls underwent surgery in Chicago. He
suffered heart failure and died there on March 10 at the
age of 76.

Formulates concept of Gestalt therapy

George A. Milite

Germany in the 1920s and early 1930s was a magnet
for avant-garde intellectuals, and both Fritz and Laura
Perls met many. Unfortunately, the rise of Hitler quickly
changed the course of German intellectual life. The Perls
family left Germany in 1934, settling in Johannesburg,
South Africa. Over the next several years, Fritz and
Laura Perls developed the ideas that would become
Gestalt psychotherapy. Perls wrote his first book, Ego,
Hunger, and Aggression,while in South Africa. It generated limited interest; it was republished in England in
1946 but still attracted less interest than Perls had hoped.
It should be understood that Perls did not abandon
Freud’s teachings in developing Gestalt therapy. Rather,
he modified some of Freud’s theories to create what he
called a more holistic approach. In particular, he focused
on present influences and experience, unlike strict
Freudians, who relied on analyzing a patient’s past experiences going back to early childhood.
In 1946, the Perls family moved briefly to Canada
and then the United States. Fritz and Laura Perls continued their work on Gestalt therapy, and Fritz Perls cowrote a book with Paul Goodman and Robert Hefferline.
The book, Gestalt Therapy, was published in 1951. It
was initially not taken seriously by the Gestalt psychology movement. In the ensuing years, however, it attracted
a greater following. Meanwhile, Perls spent his time lecturing and opening institutes where he could train
Gestalt therapists. Among the schools he founded was
the New York Institute for Gestalt Therapy, which was
run by Laura Perls.

Joins Esalen Institute
In 1964, Perls became resident psychiatrist at the
Esalen Institute in Big Sur, California. There he organized and conducted “dream workshops,” in which participants would discuss their dreams and engage in roleplaying exercises based on the characters (and sometimes objects) in their dreams. In the ensuing years he
continued to open new institutes around the country and
conduct Gestalt workshops. By this time Perls sported a
long white beard and a flowing white mane—resembling
to some a member of the counterculture that was to define the 1960s.
490

Further Reading
Perls, Frederick S. Ego, hunger, and aggression: a revision of
Freud’s theory and method. London: Allen and Unwin,
1947.
Perls, Frederick S., Paul Goodman, and Robert Hefferline.
Gestalt therapy: excitement and growth in the human personality. New York: Julian Press, 1951.

Personality
The unique pattern of psychological and behavioral characteristics by which each person can be
distinguished from other people.

Personality is fundamental to the study of psychology. The major systems evolved by psychiatrists and psychologists since Sigmund Freud to explain human mental and behavioral processes can be considered theories
of personality. These theories generally provide ways of
describing personal characteristics and behavior, establish an overall framework for organizing a wide range of
information, and address such issues as individual differences, personality development from birth through
adulthood, and the causes, nature, and treatment of psychological disorders.

Type theory of personality
Perhaps the earliest known theory of personality is
that of the Greek physician Hippocrates (c. 400 B.C.),
who characterized human behavior in terms of four temperaments, each associated with a different bodily fluid,
or “humor.” The sanguine, or optimistic, type was associated with blood; the phlegmatic type (slow and lethargic) with phlegm; the melancholic type (sad, depressed)
with black bile; and the choleric (angry) type with yellow bile. Individual personality was determined by the
amount of each of the four humors. Hippocrates’ system
remained influential in Western Europe throughout the
medieval and Renaissance periods. Abundant references
to the four humors can be found in the plays of Shakespeare, and the terms with which Hippocrates labeled the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

ploring unconscious thoughts, motivations, and conflicts
through the use of free association and other techniques.
Another distinctive feature of Freudian psychoanalysis
is its emphasis on the importance of childhood experiences in personality formation. Other psychodynamic
models were later developed by colleagues and followers
of Freud, including Carl Jung, Alfred Adler, and Otto
Rank (1884-1939), as well as other neo-Freudians such
as Erich Fromm, Karen Horney, Harry Stack Sullivan
(1892-1949), and Erik Erikson.

Trait theory of personality
A major weakness of Sheldon’s morphological classification system and other type theories in general is the
element of oversimplification inherent in placing individuals into a single category, which ignores the fact that
every personality represents a unique combination of
qualities. Systems that address personality as a combination of qualities or dimensions are called trait theories.
Well-known trait theorist Gordon Allport (1897-1967)
extensively investigated the ways in which traits combine to form normal personalities, cataloguing over
18,000 separate traits over a period of 30 years. He proposed that each person has about seven central traits that
dominate his or her behavior. Allport’s attempt to make
trait analysis more manageable and useful by simplifying
it was expanded by subsequent researchers, who found
ways to group traits into clusters through a process
known as factor analysis. Raymond B. Cattell reduced
Allport’s extensive list to 16 fundamental groups of interrelated characteristics, and Hans Eysenck claimed that
personality could be described based on three fundamental factors: psychoticism (such antisocial traits as cruelty
and rejection of social customs), introversion-extroversion, and emotionality-stability (also called neuroticism).
Eysenck also formulated a quadrant based on intersecting
emotional-stable and introverted-extroverted axes.

Phenomenological theory of personality
Another major view of personality developed during
the twentieth century is the phenomenological approach,
which emphasizes people’s self- perceptions and their
drive for self-actualization as determinants of personality. This optimistic orientation holds that people are innately inclined toward goodness, love, and creativity
and that the primary natural motivation is the drive to
fulfill one’s potential. Carl Rogers, the figure whose
name is most closely associated with phenomenological
theories of personality, viewed authentic experience of
one’s self as the basic component of growth and wellbeing. This experience together with one’s self-concept
can become distorted when other people make the positive regard we need dependent on conditions that require
the suppression of our true feelings. The client-centered
therapy developed by Rogers relies on the therapist’s
continuous demonstration of empathy and unconditional
positive regard to give clients the self-confidence to express and act on their true feelings and beliefs. Another
prominent exponent of the phenomenological approach
was Abraham Maslow, who placed self-actualization at
the top of his hierarchy of human needs. Maslow focused
on the need to replace a deficiency orientation, which
consists of focusing on what one does not have, with a
growth orientation based on satisfaction with one’s identity and capabilities.

Psychodynamic theory of personality
Twentieth-century views on personality have been
heavily influenced by the psychodynamic approach of
Sigmund Freud . Freud proposed a three-part personality
structure consisting of the id (concerned with the gratification of basic instincts), the ego (which mediates between the demands of the id and the constraints of society), and the superego (through which parental and social values are internalized). In contrast to type or trait
theories of personality, the dynamic model proposed by
Freud involved an ongoing element of conflict, and it
was these conflicts that Freud saw as the primary determinant of personality. His psychoanalytic method was
designed to help patients resolve their conflicts by ex-

Behavioral theory of personality
The behaviorist approach views personality as a pattern of learned behaviors acquired through either classical (Pavlovian) or operant (Skinnerian) conditioning
and shaped by reinforcement in the form of rewards or
punishment. A relatively recent extension of behaviorism, the cognitive-behavioral approach emphasizes the
role cognition plays in the learning process. Cognitive
and social learning theorists focus not only on the outward behaviors people demonstrate but also on their expectations and their thoughts about others, themselves,
and their own behavior. For example, one variable in the
general theory of personality developed by social learn-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

491

Personality

four personality types are still in common use today. The
theory of temperaments is among a variety of systems
that deal with human personality by dividing it into
types. A widely popularized (but scientifically dubious)
modern typology of personality was developed in the
1940s by William Sheldon, an American psychologist.
Sheldon classified personality into three categories based
on body types: the endomorph (heavy and easy-going),
mesomorph (muscular and aggressive), and ectomorph
(thin and intellectual or artistic).

Personality development

ing theorist Julian B. Rotter is internal-external orientation. “Internals” think of themselves as controlling
events, while “externals” view events as largely outside
their control. Like phenomenological theorists, those
who take a social learning approach also emphasize people’s perceptions of themselves and their abilities (a concept called “self-efficacy” by Albert Bandura). Another
characteristic that sets the cognitive-behavioral approach
apart from traditional forms of behaviorism is its focus
on learning that takes place in social situations through
observation and reinforcement, which contrasts with the
dependence of classical and operant conditioning models on laboratory research.
Aside from theories about personality structure and
dynamics, a major area of investigation in the study of
personality is how it develops in the course of a person’s
lifetime. The Freudian approach includes an extensive
description of psychosexual development from birth up
to adulthood. Erik Erikson outlined eight stages of development spanning the entire human lifetime, from birth to
death. In contrast, various other approaches, such as
those of Jung, Adler, and Rogers, have rejected the notion of separate developmental stages.
An area of increasing interest is the study of how
personality varies across cultures. In order to know
whether observations about personality structure and formation reflect universal truths or merely cultural influences, it is necessary to study and compare personality
characteristics in different societies. For example, significant differences have been found between personality
development in the individualistic cultures of the West
and in collectivist societies such as Japan, where children are taught from a young age that fitting in with the
group takes precedence over the recognition of individual achievement. Cross-cultural differences may also be
observed within a given society by studying the contrasts
between its dominant culture and its subcultures (usually
ethnic, racial, or religious groups).
Further Reading
Allport, Gordon W. Personality and Social Encounter: Selected Essays. Boston: Beacon Press, 1960.
Eysenck, Hans. The Structure of Human Personality. London:
Methuen, 1970.
Mischel, Walter. Introduction to Personality. 4th ed. New York:
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1986.

Personality development
The development of the beliefs, moods, and behaviors that differentiate among people.
492

The concept of personality refers to the profile of
stable beliefs, moods, and behaviors that differentiate
among children (and adults) who live in a particular society. The profiles that differentiate children across cultures of different historical times will not be the same because the most adaptive profiles vary with the values of
the society and the historical era. An essay on personality development written 300 years ago by a New England
Puritan would have listed piety as a major psychological
trait but that would not be regarded as an important personality trait in contemporary America.
Contemporary theorists emphasize personality
traits having to do with individualism, internalized conscience, sociability with strangers, the ability to control
strong emotion and impulse, and personal achievement.
An important reason for the immaturity of our understanding of personality development is the heavy reliance on questionnaires that are filled out by parents of
children or the responses of older children to questionnaires. Because there is less use of behavioral observations of children, our theories of personality development are not strong.
There are five different hypotheses regarding the
early origins of personality (see accompanying table).
One assumes that the child’s inherited biology, usually
called a temperamental bias, is an important basis for the
child’s later personality. Alexander Thomas and StellaChess suggested there were nine temperamental dimensions along with three synthetic types they called the
difficult child, the easy child, and the child who is slow
to warm up to unfamiliarity. Longitudinal studies of children suggest that a shy and fearful style of reacting to
challenge and novelty predicts, to a modest degree, an
adult personality that is passive to challenge and introverted in mood.
A second hypothesis regarding personality development comes from Sigmund Freud’s suggestion that variation in the sexual and aggressive aims of the id, which
is biological in nature, combined with family experience, leads to the development of the ego and superego.
Freud suggested that differences in parental socialization produced variation in anxiety which, in turn, leads
to different personalities.
A third set of hypotheses emphasizes direct social
experiences with parents. After World War II, Americans
and Europeans held the more benevolent idealistic conception of the child that described growth as motivated
by affectionate ties to others rather than by the narcissism and hostility implied by Freud’s writings. John
Bowlby contributed to this new emphasis on the infant’s
relationships with parents in his books on attachment.
Bowlby argued that the nature of the infant’s relationship

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

A fourth source of ideas for personality centers on
whether or not it is necessary to posit a self that monitors, integrates, and initiates reaction. This idea traces
itself to the Judeo-Christian assumption that it is necessary to award children a will so that they could be held
responsible for their actions. A second basis is the discovery that children who had the same objective experiences develop different personality profiles because
they construct different conceptions about themselves
and others from the same experiences. The notion that
each child imposes a personal interpretation to their experiences makes the concept of self critical to the child’s
personality.
An advantage of awarding importance to a concept
of self and personality development is that the process of
identification with parents and others gains in significance. All children wish to possess the qualities that their
culture regards as good. Some of these qualities are the
product of identification with each parent.
A final source of hypotheses regarding the origins of
personality comes from inferences based on direct observations of a child’s behavior. This strategy, which relies
on induction, focuses on different characteristics at different ages. Infants differ in irritability, three-year-olds
differ in shyness, and six-year-olds differ in seriousness
of mood. A major problem with this approach is that
each class of behavior can have different historical antecedents. Children who prefer to play alone rather than
with others do so for a variety of reasons. Some might be
temperamentally shy and are uneasy with other children
while others might prefer solitary activity.
The current categories of child psychopathology
influenced the behaviors that are chosen by scientists
for study. Fearfulness and conduct disorder predominate in clinical referrals to psychiatrists and psychologists. A cluster of behaviors that includes avoidance of
unfamiliar events and places, fear of dangerous animals, shyness with strangers, sensitivity to punishment, and extreme guilt is called the internalizing profile. The cluster that includes disobedience toward parent and teachers, aggression to peers, excessive dominance of other children, and impulsive decisions is
called the externalizing profile. These children are most
likely to be at risk for later juvenile delinquency. The
association between inability of a three-year-old to inhibit socially inappropriate behavior and later antisocial behavior is the most reliable predictive relation
between a characteristic scene in the young child and
later personality trait.

Influences on personality development
The influence comes from a variety of temperament but especially ease of arousal, irritability, fearfulness, sociability, and activity level. The experiential contributions to personality include early attachment relations, parental socialization, identification with parents,
class, and ethnic groups, experiences with other children,
ordinal position in the family, physical attractiveness,
and school success or failure, along with a number of unpredictable experiences like divorce, early parental
death, mental illness in the family, and supporting relationships with relatives or teachers.
The most important personality profiles in a particular culture stem from the challenges to which the children of that culture must accommodate. Most children
must deal with three classes of external challenges: (1)
unfamiliarity, especially unfamiliar people, tasks, and
situations; (2) request by legitimate authority or conformity to and acceptance of their standards, and (3) domination by or attack by other children. In addition, all
children must learn to control two important families of
emotions: anxiety, fear, and guilt, on the one hand, and
on the other, anger, jealousy, and resentment.
Of the four important influences on personality—
identification, ordinal position, social class, and parental
socialization—identification is the most important. By
six years of age, children assume that some of the characteristics of their parents belong to them and they experience vicariously the emotion that is appropriate to the
parent’s experience. A six-year-old girl identified with
her mother will experience pride should mother win a
prize or be praised by a friend. However, she will experience shame or anxiety if her mother is criticized or is rejected by friends. The process of identification has great
relevance to personalty development.
The child’s ordinal position in the family has its
most important influence on receptivity to accepting or
rejecting the requests and ideas of legitimate authority.
First-born children in most families are most willing
than later-borns to conform to the requests of authority.
They are more strongly motivated to achieve in school,
more conscientious, and less aggressive.
The child’s social class affects the preparation and
motivation for academic achievement. Children from
middle-class families typically obtain higher grades in
school than children of working or lower-class families
because different value systems and practices are promoted by families from varied social class backgrounds.
The patterns of socialization used by parents also influence the child’s personality. Baumrind suggests that
parents could be classified as authoritative, authoritarian,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

493

Personality development

to the caretakers and especially the mother created a profile of emotional reactions toward adults that might last
indefinitely.

Personality disorders

or permissive. More competent and mature preschool
children usually have authoritative parents who were
nurturant but made maturity demands. Moderately selfreliant children who were a bit withdrawn have authoritarian parents who more often relied on coercive discipline. The least mature children have overly permissive
parents who are nurturant but lack discipline.
Jerome Kagan Ph.D.

and are not motivated to change it. Although the DSM-IV
lists specific descriptions of ten personality disorders,
these conditions are often difficult to diagnose. Some
characteristics of the various disorders overlap. In other
cases, the complexity of human behavior makes it difficult to pinpoint a clear dividing line between pathology
and normality in the assessment of personality. There also
has been relatively little research done on some of the
personality disorders listed in DSM-IV .

Ainsworth, M. B. S., M. C. Blehar, E. Waters, and S. Wall. Patterns of Attachment. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum, 1978.
Bowlby, J. Attachment. New York: Basic Books, 1969.
———. Loss: Sadness and Depression. New York: Basic
Books, 1980.
———. Separation: Anxiety and Anger. New York: Basic
Books, 1973.
Erikson, E. H. Childhood and Society. New York: W. W. Norton, 1963.
Kagan, J. Birth to Maturity. New York: Wiley, 1962.
———. Galen’s Prophecy. New York: Basic Books, 1994.
———. The Nature of the Child. rev. ed. New York: Basic
Books, 1994.
Rothbart, M. K. “Temperament in Childhood.” n G. A. Kohnstamm, J. E. Bates, and M. K. Rothbart, eds. Temperament in Childhood. New York: Wiley, 1989, pp. 59-73.
Thomas, A. and S. Chess. Temperament and Development.
New York: Brunner Mazel, 1977.

The most effectively-diagnosed personality disorder
is the antisocial personality. The outstanding traits of this
disturbance are an inability to feel love, empathy, or
loyalty towards other people and a lack of guilt or remorse for one’s actions. Due to the lack of conscience
that characterizes it, the condition that is currently
known as antisocial personality disorder was labeled
moral insanity in the nineteenth century. More recent
names associated with this personality type are psychopath and sociopath. Unable to base their actions on
anything except their own immediate desires, persons
with this disorder demonstrate a pattern of impulsive, irresponsible, thoughtless, and sometimes criminal behavior. They are often intelligent, articulate individuals with
an ability to charm and manipulate others; at their most
dangerous, they can become violent criminals who are
particularly dangerous to society because of their ability
to gain the trust of others combined with their lack of
conscience or remorse.

Further Reading

Personality disorders
Long-standing, deeply ingrained patterns of socially maladaptive behavior that are detrimental to
those who display them or to others.

Personality disorders constitute a separate diagnostic category (Axis II) in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV). Unlike the major mental disorders
(Axis I), which are characterized by periods of illness and
remission, personality disorders are generally ongoing.
Often, they first appear in childhood or adolescence and
persist throughout a person’s lifetime. Aside from their
persistence, the other major characteristic of personality
disorders is inflexibility. Persons affected by these disorders have rigid personality traits and coping styles that
they are unable to adapt to changing situations and that
impair their social and/or occupational functioning. A
further difference between personality disorders and the
major clinical syndromes listed in Axis I of DSM-IV is
that people with personality disorders generally do not
perceive that there is anything wrong with their behavior
494

There are both biological and psychosocial theories
of the origin of antisocial personality disorder. Two of
the major components of the antisocial personality—the
constant need for thrills and excitement and the lack of
anxiety about punishment—may be at least partially explained by research suggesting that antisocial individuals
experience chronic underarousal of the central and autonomic nervous systems. In one experiment, anticipation
of an electric shock produced a dramatically lower increase of tension in teenagers diagnosed with antisocial
personality disorder than in other individuals. In terms of
environmental influences, connections have been suggested between the antisocial personality and various
patterns of familial interaction, including parental rejection or inconsistency and the retraction of punishment
when repentance is claimed.
Some personality disorders resemble chronic but
milder versions of the mental disorders listed in Axis I of
DSM-IV . In schizotypal personality disorder, for example, the schizophrenic’s hallucinations or voices are
moderated to the less extreme symptom of an “illusion”
that others are present when they are not. Speech patterns, while not incoherent like those of schizophrenia,
tend to be vague and digressive. Similarly, avoidant personality disorder has characteristics that resemble those

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Several personality disorders, including antisocial
personality, are associated with extreme and erratic behavior. The most dramatic is the histrionic personality
type, which is characterized by persistent attention-getting behavior that includes exaggerated emotional displays (such as tantrums) and overreaction to trivial problems and events. Manipulative suicide attempts may also
occur. Narcissistic personality disorder consists primarily of an inflated sense of self-importance coupled with a
lack of empathy for others. Individuals with this disorder
display an exaggerated sense of their own importance
and abilities and tend to fantasize about them. Such persons also have a sense of entitlement, expecting (and taking for granted) special treatment and concessions from
others. Paradoxically, individuals with narcissistic personality disorder are generally very insecure and suffer
from low self-esteem. Another personality disorder that
is characterized by erratic behavior is the borderline
personality. Individuals with this disorder are extremely
unstable and inconsistent in their feelings about themselves and others and tend toward impulsive and unpredictable behavior.
Several personality disorders are manifested primarily by anxiety and fearfulness. In addition to the avoidant
personality, these include the dependent, compulsive,
and passive-aggressive personality disorders. Persons
with dependent personality disorder are extremely
passive and tend to subordinate their own needs to those
of others. Due to their lack of self-confidence, they avoid
asserting themselves and allow others to take responsibility for their lives. Compulsive personality disorder is
characterized by behavioral rigidity, excessive emotional
restraint, and overly conscientious compliance with
rules. Persons with this disorder are overly cautious and
indecisive and tend to procrastinate and to become overly upset by deviations from rules and routines. Passiveaggressive personality disorder involves covert aggression expressed by a refusal to meet the expectations of
others in such areas as adequate job performance, which
may be sabotaged through procrastination, forgetfulness,
and inefficiency. This disorder is also characterized by
irritability, volatility, and a tendency to blame others for
one’s problems.

Further Reading
Beck, Aaron. Cognitive Therapy of Personality Disorders.
Guilford Press, 1990.
Millon, T. Disorders of Personality. New York: Wiley, 1981.

Personality inventory
A method of personality assessment based on a
questionnaire asking a person to report feelings or
reactions in certain situations.

Personality inventories, also called objective tests,
are standardized and can be administered to a number of
people at the same time. A psychologist need not be present when the test is given, and the answers can usually
be scored by a computer. Scores are obtained by comparison with norms for each category on the test. A personality inventory may measure one factor, such as anxiety
level, or it may measure a number of different personality traits at the same time, such as the Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (16 PF).
The personality inventory used most often for diagnosing psychological disorders is the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory, generally referred to as
the MMPI. It consists of 550 statements that the test taker
has to mark as “true,” “false,” or “cannot say.” Answers
are scored according to how they correspond with those
given by persons with various psychological disorders,
including depression, hysteria, paranoia, psychopathic
deviancy, and schizophrenia. The MMPI was originally
developed (and is still used) for the diagnosis of these and
other serious psychological problems. However enough
responses have been collected from people with less severe problems to allow for reliable scoring of responses
from these persons as well. Many people with no severe
disorder are now given the MMPI as an assessment tool
when they begin psychotherapy, with scoring geared toward personality attributes rather than clinical disorders.
The California Psychological Inventory (CPI), based
on less extreme measures of personality than the MMPI,
assesses traits, including dominance, responsibility, selfacceptance, and socialization. In addition, some parts of
the test specifically measure traits relevant to academic
achievement. Another inventory designed to measure a
spectrum of personality variables in normal populations
is the Personality Research Form (PRF), whose measurement scales include affiliation, autonomy, change,
endurance, and exhibition. The Neuroticism Extroversion Openness Personality Inventory, Revised (NEO-PIR) also measures common dimensions of personality
such as sensitivity and extroversion, but it differs from
other tests in its inclusion of both “private” and “public”

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

495

Personality inventory

of social phobia, including hypersensitivity to possible
rejection and the resulting social withdrawal in spite of a
strong need for love and acceptance. The paranoid and
schizoid personality disorders are usually manifested
primarily in odd or eccentric behavior. The former is
characterized mainly by suspiciousness of others, extreme vigilance against anticipated misdeeds, and insistence on personal autonomy. The latter involves emotional coldness and passivity, indifference to the feelings
of others, and trouble forming close relationships.

Pervasive developmental disorder (PDD)

versions. The questions in the private version are answered like those in other personality inventories, but the
public version consists of having another person acquainted with the test taker answer questions about him
or her. Significant discrepancies between the two versions can be an important source of information for those
interpreting the test.
Further Reading
Cronbach, L.J. Essentials of Psychological Testing. New York:
Harper and Row, 1970.
Sundberg, N. The Assessment of Persons. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1977.

Pervasive developmental
disorder (PDD)
A group of conditions involving serious impairment in several areas of development, including
physical, behavioral, cognitive, social, and language development.

The incidence of pervasive development disorders
(PDDs) in the general population is estimated at 1%.
These disorders are thought to be genetically based, and
there is no evidence linking them to environmental factors. Many children who are diagnosed with PDDs today
would have been labeled psychotic or schizophrenic in
the past. The most serious form of pervasive developmental disorder is autism, a congenital condition characterized by severely impaired social interaction, communication, and abstract thought, and often manifested by
stereotyped and repetitive behavior patterns.
In addition to autism, several other conditions are
considered pervasive developmental disorders by the
American Psychiatric Association. Rett’s disorder is
characterized by physical, mental, and social impairment
that appears between the ages of five months and four
years in children whose development has been normal up
to that point. Occurring only in girls, it involves impairment of coordination, repetitive movements, a slowing of
head growth, and severe or profound mental retardation,
as well as impaired social and communication skills.
Childhood disintegrative disorder is marked by the deteri-

This autistic child is encouraged to interact with the guinea pig in an effort to improve his social interaction. (Photo by Helen
B. Senisi. Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

496

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Asperger’s disorder includes many of the same social and behavioral impairments as autism, except for
difficulties with language. Children with this disorder
lack normal tools of social interaction, such as the ability to meet someone else’s gaze, use appropriate body
language and gestures, or react to another person’s
thoughts and feelings. Behavioral impairments include
the repetitive, stereotyped motions and rigid adherence
to routines that are characteristic of autism. Like childhood disintegrative disorder, Asperger’s disorder is
thought to be more common in males than females.
Research based on autopsies and magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) of live patients shows that PDDs are connected with specific abnormalities in the brain. These
conditions are usually evident in early childhood and
often cause some degree of mental retardation. They are
not curable, but there are a variety of treatments that can
alleviate specific symptoms and help children function
better in daily life. Drugs like Prozac, Zoloft, and Luvox,
all selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), can reduce aggression and repetitive thoughts and improve social interaction. Attention problems and hyperactivity respond to psychostimulants, such as Ritalin, Dexedrine,
and Cylert, which can make children more responsive to
other types of intervention. Behavior therapy has helped
children with PDDs minimize negative behavior, such as
repetitive activities and persistent preoccupations, and
group therapy has helped improve social skills.
Education is an important component in the treatment of PDDs. Special education programs that address
all types of developmental problems—social, linguistic,
and behavioral—are mandated by federal law and available to children from the ages of four or five. Even those
children with PDDs who can be enrolled in regular classes can benefit from supplemental special instruction programs. Speech, language, and occupational therapy can
help children with PDDs, including autism, function at
the highest level possible. In many cases, appropriate education and therapy from the earliest age can save these
children from institutionalization.
Further Reading
Haskell, Simon H. The Education of Children with Motor and
Neurological Disabilities. New York: Nichols, 1989.

Philosophical psychology

oration of previously acquired physical, social, and communication skills after at least two years of normal development. It first appears between the ages of two and 10,
usually at three or four years of age, and many of its
symptoms resemble those of autism. Other names for this
disorder are Heller’s syndrome, dementia infantilis, and
disintegrative psychosis. It sometimes appears in conjunction with a medical condition such as Schilder’s disease,
but usually no organic cause can be found.

Lewis, Vicky. Development and Handicap. New York: B.
Blackwell, 1987.

Phallic stage
See Psychosexual stages

Philosophical psychology
The area of study where psychology and philosophy intersect, focusing on metaphysical and speculative problems in the study of mental processes.

One of the central questions in philosophical psychology has been the relationship between the mind and
body, a perennial area of inquiry throughout the history
of philosophy. Other topics considered in this discipline
include memory, perception, and consciousness; the
nature of the self; the existence of free will; the relationship between thought and emotion; and so-called irrational phenomena, such as self-deception.
The study of the mind and mental processes was traditionally the province of philosophers, but philosophy
and psychology began to diverge with the advent of experimental psychology as practiced by such figures as
Gustav Fechner (1801-1887) and Wilhelm Wundt
(1832-1920) in the nineteenth century. In the twentieth
century, the separation of the two disciplines became
standard in American universities, resulting in the establishment of professional associations and journals devoted to psychology and its practitioners. This schism was
further entrenched with the rise of behaviorism, which
advocated behavior as the sole focus of psychology and
rejected introspective inquiry and the study of consciousness. In 1925, the prominent American behaviorist John
Watson predicted the demise of philosophy as a field of
inquiry altogether.
In the 1950s, however, psychologists and philosophers increasingly found themselves once again on common ground. The “cognitive revolution” shifted the
focus of psychology back to mental processes and such
topics as language acquisition and mental representation.
In turn, philosophy has demonstrated a growing interest
in the empirical side of psychology; philosophers have
studied the clinical foundations of psychoanalysis as
well as topics such as behavior modification. Representative journals in philosophical psychology include Philosophy of Science, Mind, British Journal of Psychology,
and The Philosophical Review.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

497

Phobia

Further Reading

fear of being in public places in unfamiliar settings. Some
agoraphobics fear open spaces, like large bodies of water
or open fields without fences. Most agoraphobics fear
more than one situation, which contributes to the disabling nature of the disorder. The list of fears is long and
extensive: public transportation, bridges, tunnels, crowded theaters, or simply being home alone. Agoraphobia
rarely begins before age 18 or after 35. Sometimes it appears to be precipitated by major illness or stress.

Russell, Bertrand. The Analysis of Mind. New York: Macmillan, 1921.
Strawson, Peter. Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1959.

Phobia
An excessive, unrealistic fear of a specific object,
situation, or activity that causes a person to avoid
that object, situation, or activity.

Unlike generalized anxiety, phobias involve specific, identifiable but usually irrational fears. Phobias are
common occurrences among a large segment of the population. People with phobias recognize that their fears
are irrational, yet avoid the source to spare themselves of
the resultinganxiety. Phobias are classified as disorders
only when they interfere substantially with a person’s
daily life.
Psychologists have identified three categories of
phobic disorders. The first, simple phobia, is defined in
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
as a persistent, irrational fear of, and compelling desire
to avoid, an object or a situation other than being alone,
or in public places away from home (agoraphobia) or of
humiliation or embarrassment in certain social situations
(social phobia). Simple phobia causes considerable distress when confronted because the person realizes that
the fear is excessive and irrational. Such phobias are not
indicative of other mental disorders. Almost any object
or situation can be the cause of a simple phobia. Common phobias include fear of snakes (ophidiophobia), enclosed places (claustrophobia), and spiders (arachnophobia). Fear of heights, doctors and dentists, loud noises,
storms, and the sight of blood also are experienced by
large numbers of people. Animal phobias, the most common type of simple phobia, usually develop in early
childhood. Most people do not seek treatment for simple
phobias; they simply avoid the object or situation.

Like other anxiety disorders, phobias can be treated
with drugs, behavior therapy or both. Drug therapy
usually includes minor tranquilizers like Librium or Valium, taken before a situation in which a phobia is likely
to be introduced. Behavior therapy attempts to reduce a
patient’s anxiety through exposure to the phobia. For example, patients are guided step-by-step from imaginary
confrontation of the phobia (visualizing a snake, for example) to actually experiencing it (holding a real snake).
Gradualdesensitization is most successful in treating
simple phobias.
Further Reading
Atkinson, Rita L.; Richard C. Atkinson; Edward E. Smith; and
Ernest R. Hilgard. Introduction to Psychology. 9th ed. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
Goodwin, Donald W. Anxiety. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1986.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. 12th ed. Glenview,
IL: Scott, Foresman, 1988.

Phrenology
An approach, primarily of historical interest, to describing the thinking process based on the belief
that different mental capacities are controlled by
specific locations in the brain.

The second category of phobic disorders are social
phobias. People with social phobias avoid social situations because they are afraid of embarrassing themselves. Fear of public speaking, fear of using public toilets, and fear of eating in public are common social phobias. Most social phobias develop over a period of time,
beginning in adolescence or the early 20s, and rarely
over the age of 30.

Although people recognize the brain as the center
of mental processes, this contemporary view has not always been accepted. Philosophers and scientists have
proposed different ideas throughout history about the
process of thinking that have since been rejected as inaccurate. One such rejected approach was phrenology.
Phrenologists believed that our different mental capacities were controlled by specific locations in the brain.
Although scientists today recognize the general validity
of this belief, the problem was that the phrenologists developed ideas that did not really describe the way the
brain functions.

Agoraphobia, the third category of phobic disorders,
is the most disabling and the most difficult to treat. Agoraphobia can be defined as the fear of being alone, or the

German scientist Franz Joseph Gall (1758-1828), a
recognized expert on anatomy, proposed the initial ideas
on phrenology. He proposed that some areas of the brain

498

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Physiological psychology

were highly developed in certain individuals, which lead
to specific behaviors. For instance, he claimed that pickpockets were acquisitive (i.e., possessed the desire to
own things) because of excess development of an area on
the side of the head. One of Gall’s contemporaries, Johann Spurzheim (1776-1832) identified 35 different
mental faculties and suggested the location in the brain
that related to each one. Each trait was claimed to lead to
a certain behavior; the inclination toward that behavior
could be detected by assessing the bumps on a person’s
skull. Scientists now recognize that the shape of the skull
does not relate to the shape of the brain.
From the start, phrenology was controversial. For
instance, the Roman Catholic church pressured the Austrian government to prevent Gall from lecturing in an
area that the Church regarded as materialistic and atheistic. This tactic apparently served to increase the interest
in phrenology. Although Gall developed his ideas with a
serious scientific perspective, Spurzheim was more of an
entrepreneur. He coined the term phrenology (which
Gall never accepted), popularized it, and brought it to the
United States. Spurzheim’s goal was to reform education, religion, and penology using principles of phrenology. He died shortly after arriving in America, however.
Spurzheim’s work was continued by the British phrenologist George Combe (1788-1858), whose book on
phrenology, Constitution of Man, was quite popular. According to psychology historian David Hothersall,
Combe was highly respected by scientists in the United
States. He was elected to the National Academy of Sciences. Interestingly, at one point he was asked to justify
slavery on the grounds that people of African descent
had “inferior” skulls. Combe refused, noting that educated slaves were the intellectual equals of white people.
Similarly, Combe rejected the second-class status of
women, asserting that they were not intellectually or
emotionally inferior to men.
Two enterprising brothers, Orson and Lorenzo
Fowler, marketed phrenology as a means by which people could improve themselves. Unlike Gall, who believed that heredity dictated one’s strengths and weaknesses, the Fowlers preached the environmental message
that people could improve themselves by practice and
could overcome weaknesses by virtue of their will. They
wrote extensively for popular audiences and published a
journal of phrenology that existed from the 1840s to
1911. They also set up a clinic in New York where
clients could be tested; they toured the United States,
giving advice wherever they went; and they emphasized
the practical vision of phrenology, minimizing the scientific aspects of their field.
Meanwhile, scientists and philosophers quickly dismissed phrenological ideas. Leading biologists and

Bust showing the traits that phrenologists assigned to the
different parts of the skull. (Brooks/Brown. Photo
Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

physicians of the day showed that the specific locations
deemed important by the phrenologists were not associated with specific mental processes. Similarly, careful research in the area revealed that phrenologists were susceptible to biased observations in cases in which the research supported phrenological claims. During the 19th
century, at the height of phrenology’s popularity among
the general public, scientists regarded the field with disdain and characterized it as a discipline dressed up to
look like science. Nonetheless, phrenology exerted a
positive influence on the fields of physiology and, later,
biology, and sparked research on the relationship between the brain and behavior.
Further Reading
Cooter, Roger. The Cultural Meaning of Popular Science.
Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1984.
Hothersall, David. History of Psychology. 2nd ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1990.

Physiological psychology
The area of experimental psychology concerned
specifically with how biology shapes behavior and
mental processes.

The area of experimental known as physiological
psychology has evolved in the 1990s. Increasingly, the
field is being referred to as behavioral neuroscience, replacing physiological psychology and biological psychology. Nonetheless, the goals of psychologists in this
field remain the same: to utilize basic research to explain
behavior in physiological terms, working on the assump-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

499

Jean Piaget

tion that for every behavioral event there is a corresponding physical event or series of events.
The physiological psychologist (or behavioral neuroscientist) is also concerned with the functioning of the
adrenal glands and with the physical processes involved
in sensation. Although physiological psychology is concerned with physical organisms, it is distinguished from
such life sciences as physiology and biology by its focus
on behavior. Researchers may investigate questions such
as how the brain controls physical movements or regulates eating; the role of sex hormones in violent behavior; the effects of drugs on memory and personality; the
physiological basis for sleep and dreaming; and the areas
of the brain devoted to language functions. Physiological
psychology overlaps with the field of neurobiology,
which is the study of the nervous system and its functions. A related field is psychopharmacology, the study
of drugs and behavior.
Another subfield of physiological psychology, psychophysiology, deals with the measurement of physiological responses as they relate to behavior. Practical applications include lie detector tests; clinical tests of vision and hearing; tests of brain activity in individuals
with mental retardation and neurological and behavioral disorders; and biofeedback training.
Further Reading
Asimov, Isaac. The Human Brain: Its Capacities and Functions. New York: Penguin, 1994.
Guiley, Rosemary. The Encyclopedia of Dreams: Symbols and
Interpretations. New York: Crossroad, 1993.
Mind and Brain: Readings from Scientific American Magazine.
New York: W.H. Freeman, 1993.

Jean Piaget
1896-1980
French psychologist, philosopher, and naturalist.

Jean Piaget is universally known for his studies of
the development of intelligence in children. Although he
is one of the creators of child psychology as it exists
today, psychology was for him only a tool of epistemology (the theory of knowledge). He identified his domain
as “genetic [i.e., developmental] epistemology.” He thus
studied the growth of children’s capacity to think in abstract, logical terms, and of such categories as time,
space, number, causality, and permanency, describing an
invariable sequence of stages from birth through adolescence. A prolific author, he wrote over fifty books and
hundreds of articles.
500

Jean Piaget (Farrell Grehan/Corbis. Reproduced with
permission.)

Piaget was born in 1896 in the French-speaking
Swiss city of Neuchâtel, the son of an agnostic medievalist and a religious mother with socialist leanings. After
completing a doctoral thesis in natural sciences (1918),
and studies in psychology and philosophy in Zurich and
Paris, he joined the Rousseau Institute of Geneva in
1921, which was founded by Edouard Claparède as a
center for research on child development and education.
He later taught experimental and developmental psychology, sociology, and history and philosophy of sciences, mainly at the University of Geneva. Piaget died in
1980. His interdisciplinary International Center for Genetic Epistemology (established in 1955) closed in 1984.
As an adolescent, Piaget published numerous papers
on the classification of mollusks. During World War I, he
was active in socialist and Christian student groups, and
sketched a theory of organic, psychological, and social
phenomena aimed at providing a scientific basis for postwar reconstruction. Much of his later thinking built directly on his youthful speculations and values, but its empirical impetus derived from his own reaction against the
metaphysical and mystical tendencies of his adolescence.
Piaget devised a “clinical method” that combined
standard intelligence tests and open-ended conversations

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Piaget and his collaborators created many original
and ingenious problem-solving situations that became
paradigms for research all of the world. In one famous
experiment, children sat facing a scale model of three
mountains and were asked to choose from a series of pictures the one that represents the mountains as seen by a
doll sitting at other positions. Younger subjects systematically identified the doll’s viewpoint with their own.
Studies of “conservation” provide further notable examples: the child is presented with two identical balls of
clay; the shape of one is modified, and the child is asked
whether the amount, weight, or volume of clay has
changed. Other situations involve manipulating blocks or
pouring identical quantities of liquid in differently
shaped containers.
Most of the research Piaget inspired is disconnected
from the theoretical goals of genetic epistemology. His
work had some direct impact on mathematical and moral
education, and reinforced the belief that instruction must
be adapted to the child’s developmental level. But it is
Piaget’s investigative techniques, formulation of new
problems, insightful observations, and emphasis on the
development of cognitive capacities that form some of
the bases of contemporary child psychology.
Further Reading
Boden, M. Jean Piaget. Penguin Books, 1979.
Gruber, H., and J. Voneche, eds. The Essential Piaget. New
York: Basic Books, 1977.
Piaget, J. Genetic Epistemology. Trans. E. Duckworth. New
York: Norton, 1970.

Vidal, F. Piaget Before Piaget. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1994.

Philippe Pinel
1745-1826
French physician and one of the founders of psychiatry.

Philippe Pinel was born near Toulouse, France, the
son of a surgeon. After first studying literature and theology, he pursued medical studies at the University of
Toulouse, receiving his M.D. in 1773. In 1778, Pinel
moved to Paris, where he worked as a publisher, translator of scientific writings, and teacher of mathematics. He
also wrote and published articles, a number of them
about mental disorders, a topic in which he had become
interested due to the illness of a friend. In 1792, Pinel
was appointed chief physician and director of the Bicêtre
asylum, where he was able to put into practice his ideas
on treatment of the mentally ill, who were commonly
kept chained in dungeons at the time. Pinel petitioned to
the Revolutionary Committee for permission to remove
the chains from some of the patients as an experiment,
and to allow them to exercise in the open air. When these
steps proved to be effective, he was able to change the
conditions at the hospital and discontinue the customary
methods of treatment, which included bloodletting, purging, and physical abuse.
Rejecting the prevailing popular notion that mental
illness was caused by demonic possession, Pinel was
among the first to believe that mental disorders could be
caused by psychological or social stress, congenital conditions, or physiological injury. He strongly argued for
the humane treatment of mental patients, including a
friendly interaction between doctor and patient, and for
the maintenance and preservation of detailed case histories for the purpose of treatment and research. In 1795,
Pinel was appointed chief physician at Salpêtrière, where
he effected reforms similar to those at Bicétre. Pinel remained at Salpêtrière for the remainder of his career. His
student, Jean Esquirol, succeeded him and expanded his
reform efforts throughout France. The success of Pinel’s
methods also influenced practices in other countries, including England.
In 1795, Pinel was appointed to the faculty of the
newly opened medical school in Paris, where he was
professor of medical pathology for the next 20 years. He
was elected to the Academy of Science in 1804 and the
Academy of Medicine in 1820. Besides his work in hospitals, Pinel also treated patients privately as a consulting
physician. Although he is regarded today as a pioneering

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

501

Philippe Pinel

with school-age children. In his first five books, he studied children’s language, reasoning, conceptions of the
world, theories of causality, and moral judgment. He
found that children are at first “egocentric” (incapable of
taking another person’s point of view) and attached to
concrete appearances, but that they gradually move away
from egocentrism and become capable of abstract thinking. Piaget’s observations of his own children led to The
Origins of Intelligence (1952) and The Construction of
Reality (1954), where he describes how basic forms of
intentionality, and of the categories of object, space,
causality, and time evolve between the onset of the newborn’s reflex activities and the emergence of language at
about 18 months; Play, Dreams, and Imitation (1951),
deals with the development of mental representation up
to the age of six. In these three classics, Piaget expounded the notion of intelligence as a form of adaptation to
the external world. Starting in the 1940s, Piaget and
Bärbel Inhelder studied the development of logical and
formal thought in various fields (conceptions of movement, speed, time, space, geometry, chance, and probability). One of his major works, Introduction to Genetic
Epistemology (1950), remains untranslated.

Placebo effect

emphasized the importance of physical hygiene and exercise, and pioneered in recommending productive work
for mental patients. In addition, Pinel concerned himself
with the proper administration of psychiatric facilities,
including the training of their personnel.

Placebo effect
In research, a scientifically significant response that
cannot be explained by physiological variables and
is assumed to be psychological in origin.

Philippe Pinel (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

figure in psychiatry, during his lifetime Pinel was known
chiefly for his contributions to internal medicine, especially his authoritative classification of diseases in the
textbook Nosographie philosophique (1798), in which he
divided diseases into five classes—fevers, phlegmasias,
hemorrhages, neuroses, and diseases caused by organic
lesions. Pinel’s extensive contributions to medical research also include data on the development, prognosis,
and frequency of occurrence of various illnesses, and experiments measuring the effectiveness of medicines.
Pinel established an inoculation clinic at Salpêtrière in
1799, and the first vaccination in Paris was given there in
April of the following year.
In addition to transforming psychiatric facilities
from prisons into hospitals, Pinel did much to establish
psychiatry formally as a separate branch of medicine,
publishing numerous articles on the topic which were
collected in “Recherches et observations sur le traitement moral des aliénés” (1799) and his book Traîte
medico-philosophique de l’aliénation mentale (MedicalPhilosophical Treatise on Mental Alienation or Mania,
1801), which is considered a classic of psychiatry.
Pinel’s practice of interacting individually with his patients in a humane and understanding manner represented the first known attempt at psychotherapy. He also
502

Placebos are substances with no known pharmacological value that are given to members of a control
group in an experiment. In studies determining the effectiveness of a particular drug, for example, the experimental group is given the drug being studied and the
control group is given a placebo, which is made to look
exactly like the actual drug. Neither group, nor the researchers, knows which received the drug and which the
placebo. If the members of each group show similar responses, the placebo effect has been produced. For reasons not completely understood, the patients given the
placebo have experienced the effects of the drug without
actually taking it. In such cases, the drug itself is considered ineffective.
The placebo effect has been noted since ancient
times, when animal parts or other naturally occurring
substances were given as treatment for various human
diseases and ailments. Throughout medical history, patients have recovered from illnesses after healers employed substances or methods that scientifically should
have no effect. It is believed that patients’ expectations
that their condition will improve plays a major role in
producing the placebo effect.
The use of placebos in psychotherapy is controversial, with some critics contending that it links therapists
with “quack” treatments rather than legitimate, scientifically measurable methods. However, most researchers
agree that the placebo effect, while not completely understood, plays a major and beneficial role in both physiological and psychological treatment.
Further Reading
Atkinson, Rita L.; Richard C. Atkinson; Edward E. Smith; and
Ernest R. Hilgard. Introduction to Psychology. 9th ed. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. 12th ed. Glenview,
IL: Scott, Foresman, 1988.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Activity that is not required, but is enjoyed.

While the term “play” may refer to an extremely
varied range of activities, certain broad, defining characteristics have been noted. Perhaps the most basic one is
that play is something that is not required. Although the
enjoyment derived from it may be needed emotionally,
no single play activity itself is necessary for survival.
Thus, play is referred to as “autotelic”—it is engaged in
for its own sake, with the reward inherent in the activity
itself. Nevertheless, in spite of its detachment from survival and financial gain, play is engaged in wholeheartedly. During the time allotted to play, it commands a person’s entire attention.
Play takes place in a realm divorced from ordinary
reality and governed by its own rules, which may be
more complex and absolute than those of many “serious”
activities. It is also bound in terms of both time and
space. The period during which one engages in play has
time limits: it begins, proceeds, and inevitably ends
when one returns to “real life.” Play is also set apart in
space—a person generally goes somewhere special (even
if it is only the “play room” or the “playground”) to engage in play. The relationship between play and tension
has also been noted. While tension is not absent from
play itself, the ultimate result is the reduction of tension
and conflict. Based on this feature, play has often been
viewed as a “safety valve” for the harmless discharge of
tensions and conflicts.
In children, play is a necessary vehicle for normal
physical, social, and cognitive development. The well
known early 20th-century American psychologist G.
Stanley Hall (1844-1924) viewed the evolution of children’s play as recapitulating the evolution of the human
species. Individually, play develops in stages that correspond to a child’s social and cognitive development. Initially, a child’s play is solitary in nature. Next comes parallel play, where children are in each others’ company
but playing independently. Socially, the final stage is cooperative play, which consists of organized activities
characterized by social roles.
Jean Piaget formulated a series of developmental
stages of play that corresponded to the successive stages
in his influential theory of cognitive development in children. The sensorimotor stage (birth to approximately
two years old), when children are focused on gaining
mastery of their own bodies and external objects, is characterized by “practice play” consisting of repeated patterns of movement or sound, such as sucking, shaking,
banging, babbling, and, eventually, “peekaboo” games in

The preoperational stage (ages 2-7 years) is marked
by the ability to master symbolic functions, including
the association of objects with words, and the transition
from an egocentric focus to an awareness that events
have causes outside themselves. At this stage, children
begin to engage in make-believe games marked by the
use of objects for purposes other than their intended
function. Between the ages of 4 and 7, when their thinking is still dominated by intuition rather than logic, children first become interested in games characterized by
rules, structure, and social interaction. As they move
through the concrete operational stage (ages 7-11), during which categorizing activities and the earliest logical
operations occur, the types of rules governing their play
and the reasons for following them change. At first, rules
are centered on the sensorimotor aspects of play and
largely provide structure and repetition. Gradually, they
become more focused on the social aspects of play and
are connected with acceptance by the group. By the
fourth, or formal operations stage (ages 12 and higher),
with the gradual emergence of a mature ability to reason,
competitive games and games with codes of rules begin
to predominate.
While other psychologists have proposed schemes
that vary from this one theory, there is general agreement
on its broad outlines. Some additional categorizations of
children’s play that have been proposed include diversive
play, composed of aimless activities that serve as a diversion when a child is bored; mimetic play, which is repetitious, structured, and symbolic; and cathartic play, which
is therapeutic in nature.
One of the first to use play in therapy with children
was Hermine Hug-Hellmuth in 1921, following Freud’s
work with “Little Hans,” a five-year-old boy with a phobia. British psychoanalyst Melanie Klein used play as a
source to a child’s unconscious from which she could
make interpretations, starting in 1919. Just as adults used
free association to communicate about their unconscious and talk to communicate about their feelings, theorists reasoned that children communicate through their
natural play what they cannot yet verbalize. Play therapy
was used by Anna Freud to help children develop a
closer connection to the therapist. A more structured approach came about in the 1930s with David Levy using
play therapy to help children work through and re-enact
stressful situations to release them. In keeping with Carl
Rogers’ non-directive play work in the 1940s, Virginia

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

503

Play

Play

which objects are made to repeatedly disappear and
reappear. As children learn more about the properties of
objects and learn how to manipulate them, they begin to
monitor the effects of play on their environment, and
their relationship with that environment becomes increasingly systematic.

Pleasure principle
These Columbian girls are engaged in cooperative play, the final stage of playing activities. (AP/Wide World Photos.
Reproduced with permission.)

Axline used non-directive play to allow a child to freely
be himself or herself, working toward self-realization.
By the 1960s, schools had introduced guidance and
counseling services. A number of counselors, including
Garry Landreth urged in writings that school counselors
incorporate play therapy to meet the developmental
needs of all children. The International Association for
Play Therapy formed in 1982 and now has 3,300 members worldwide. Play therapy has grown in its applications, expanding to include adults and families and into
hospitals as well. The therapy usually occurs in a playroom, specially designed for children and furnished with
toys and equipment to facilitate children’s play.
See also Cognitive development
Further Reading
Dolinar, Kathleen J. Learning Through Play: Curriculum and
Activities for the Inclusive Classroom. Albany, NY: Delmar, 1994.
Gil, Eliana Play in Family Therapy. New York: Guilford Press,
1994.
Landreth, Garry L. Play Therapy: The Art of the Relationship
Muncie, Indiana: Accelerated Development Inc., 1991.
504

Moyles, Janet R. The Excellence of Play. Philadelphia: Open
University Press, 1994.
Hughes, Fergus P. Children, Play, and Development. Boston:
Allyn and Bacon, 1991.

Pleasure principle
The theoretical principle that humans make decisions to seek pleasure and minimize pain.

Among other principles, Freudian psychology states
that there is a basic human tendency to seek pleasure and
avoid pain. It arises from the desire for unrestrained expression of both the life instinct (Eros) associated with
sexuality and the death instinct (Thanatos) associated
with aggression and destructiveness. Freud described
the pleasure principle in terms of the need to discharge
or reduce tensions—experienced as pain or discomfort—
created internally or by external stimuli. The id, which
operates on the pleasure principle, is the instrument for
discharging these tensions. However, it is held in check
by the ego, operating on the opposed reality principle,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The promptings of the pleasure principle, which are
often compared to the demands of a child, seek immediate gratification and are ungoverned by social or moral
rules. The reality principle opposes many of these
promptings, denying them altogether or postponing gratification either until a socially appropriate time (waiting
until a meal to eat) or so that greater pleasure may be
achieved in the long run (studying for a degree or training for a sport).

shifting moral connotations of the concept of sexual obscenity, it is not possible to completely and objectively define the term pornography, and that, in the final analysis,
pornography is in the eye of the beholder.
Further Reading
Hunter, Ian. On Pornography. New York: St. Martin’s Press,
1993.

Post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD)

Further Reading
Freud, Sigmund. New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis. New York: W. W. Norton, 1933.
Hall, Calvin S. A Primer of Freudian Psychology. New York:
Harper and Row, 1982.

Pornography
Any printed or pictorial material containing representations of sexually obscene behavior, intended
to sexually arouse its audience.

There is an obvious and necessary imprecision in this
definition of the term pornography, in the sense that what
is considered to be sexually obscene behavior, and, for
that matter, what might sexually arouse an audience, vary
quite widely from time to time, from place to place, and
from individual to individual. Nearly all modern societies
have laws that prohibit the possession or distribution of at
least some forms of pornography, although the statutory
suppression and criminalization of sexually obscene material is a relatively recent phenomenon, and is significantly
predated by the legal censorship of material that was
judged to be sacrilegious or antireligious (religiously obscene) or seditious or treasonous (politically obscene).
Generally, laws against pornography have been based on
the controversial assumption that exposure to pornography morally corrupts individuals and is a cause of sexual
crimes. In the United States, legislation concerning
pornography dates from the middle of the 19th century.
Since that time, the admittedly elusive legal definition of
what constitutes pornography and can be regulated by law
has evolved into material that portrays sexual conduct in a
patently offensive way and appeals to prurient interest in
sex, as judged by an average person applying contemporary community standards, and which, on the whole, does
not have serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific
value. When necessary, the judgment of whether or not
material is pornographic is usually made by a jury. Many
authorities have concluded that, because of the constantly

A psychological disorder that develops in response
to an extremely traumatic event that threatens a
person’s safety or life.

Although the term post-traumatic stress disorder is
relatively new, the symptoms of PTSD can be recognized
in many guises throughout history, from the reactions to
the great fire of London that Samuel Pepys (1633-1703)
described in the 1600s to the “shell shock” of soldiers in
World War I. Some psychologists suspect that the “hysterical” women treated by Josef Breuer (1842-1925) and
Sigmund Freud at the turn of the twentieth century may
have been suffering from symptoms of PTSD as a result
of childhood sexual abuse or battering by their husbands.
Post-traumatic stress disorder has been classified as
an anxiety disorder in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders since 1980. People suffering from PTSD repeatedly re-experience the traumatic event vividly in their
thoughts, perceptions, images, or dreams. They may be
aware that they are recollecting a previous experience, or
they may have hallucinations, delusions, or dissociative
flashbacks that make them feel as though the trauma is
actually recurring in the present. Children may engage in
repetitive play that expresses some aspect of the trauma.
A related symptom is the consistent avoidance of people,
objects, situations, and other stimuli connected with the
event. PTSD sufferers usually experience heightened
arousal in the form of agitation, irritability, insomnia,
difficulty concentrating, or being easily startled. In contrast, they often “shut down” emotionally and become
incapable of expressing certain feelings, especially those
associated with affection and intimacy. Children who
have been traumatized may stop talking altogether or
refuse to discuss the traumatic event that affected them.
They may also experience physical symptoms such as
headaches or stomach aches.
Events that may lead to post-traumatic stress disorder include natural disasters (earthquakes, floods, hurri-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

505

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)

which mediates between the primitive desires of the id
and the constraints of the external world.

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
A Bosnian man with post-traumatic stress disorder talks to a therapist. (AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced with permission.)

canes) or serious accidents such as automobile or plane
crashes. However, PTSD is most likely to be caused by
traumas in which death and injury are inflicted by other
human beings: war, torture, rape, terrorism, and other
types of personal assault that violate one’s sense of selfesteem and personal integrity. (PTSD also tends to be
more severe and long-lasting when it results from traumas of this nature.) In addition to the direct experience
of traumatic events, PTSD can also be caused by witnessing such events or by learning of serious harm to a
family member or a close friend. Specific populations in
which PTSD has been studied include Vietnam veterans
and Holocaust survivors.
Among the disorders listed in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual, the diagnosis for PTSD is unique in
its focus on external events rather than internal predispositions or personality features. Studies have found that
such factors as race, sex, socioeconomic status, and even
previous psychiatric history have little to do with the incidence of PTSD. Whether a person develops PTSD is
much more closely related to the severity and duration of
the traumatic event experienced than to any preexisting
characteristics or situations. Physiologically, post-trau506

matic stress disorder is thought to be related to changes
in brain chemistry and levels of stress-related hormones. When a person is subjected to excessive stress
levels on a prolonged basis, the adrenal glands—which
fuel the “fight-or-flight” reaction by producing adrenaline—may be permanently damaged. One possible result
is overfunctioning during subsequent stress, causing hyperarousal symptoms such as insomnia, jumpiness, and
irritability. The brain’s neurotransmitters, which play a
role in transmitting nerve impulses from one cell to another, may be depleted by severe stress, leading to mood
swings, outbursts of temper, and depression.
Post-traumatic stress disorder can affect persons of
any age and is thought to occur in as many as 30 percent
of disaster victims. In men, it is most commonly caused
by war; in women, by rape. Symptoms usually begin
within one to three months of the trauma, although in
some cases they are delayed by months or even years. If
left undiagnosed and untreated, PTSD can last for
decades. However, over half of all affected persons who
receive treatment recover completely within three
months. Short-term psychotherapy (12 to 20 sessions)
has been the single most effective treatment for PTSD. It

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The primary goal of psychotherapy is to have the
person confront and work through the traumatic experience. Hypnosis may be especially valuable in retrieving
thoughts and memories that have been blocked. One
technique used by therapists is to focus on measures that
PTSD sufferers took to save or otherwise assert themselves in the face of traumatic events, thus helping to
allay the feelings of powerlessness and loss of control
that play a large part in the disorder. Behavioral techniques such as relaxation training and systematic desensitization to “triggering” stimuli have also proven helpful. Support groups consisting of other persons who have
experienced the same or similar traumas have facilitated
the healing process for many persons with PTSD.
See also Combat neurosis
Further Reading
Matsakis, Aphrodite. I Can’t Get Over It: A Handbook for
Trauma Survivors. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications, 1992.
McCann, Lisa. Psychological Trauma and the Adult Survivor:
Theory, Therapy, and Transformation. New York: Brunner/Mazel, 1990.
Porterfield, Kay Marie. Straight Talk about Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder: Coping with the Aftermath of Trauma.
New York: Facts on File, 1996.

Further Information
The International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies. 435
North Michigan Ave., Suite 1717, Chicago, IL 60611,
(312) 644–0828.

Rollo May has written about power in terms of individual human potential, referring to the roots of the
word “power” in the Latin word posse, which means
“to be able.” May distinguishes among five levels of intrapsychic power. The most basic level, the power to
be, is literally the power to exist, which is threatened if
one is denied the basic conditions of human sustenance.
The second level, self-affirmation, goes beyond mere
survival and involves recognition and esteem by others,
while the third, self-assertion, refers to the more strenuous affirmation of one’s existence that is required in the
face of opposition. The next level of power,
aggression, develops when one’s access to other forms
of self-assertion is blocked. In contrast to self-assertion, which May views as essentially defensive, aggression involves the active pursuit of power or territory.
The endpoint in May’s continuum of power is violence,
which, unlike the other levels, is divorced from reason
and verbal persuasion.
Power in its other sense—that of power over others—is a fundamental feature of all relationships,
whether each party has a certain degree of power over
the other (which is usually the case) or all the power resides with one party. Power may be based on force, acknowledged expertise, the possession of specific information that people want, the ability to reward others, or
legitimization (the perception that one has the right to
exercise it).
Other bases for power include identification with
those who wield it and reciprocity (indebtedness to the
wielder of power for providing a prior benefit of some
sort). May has described various types of interpersonal
power, ranging from harmful to beneficial: exploitative
(characterized solely by brute force); manipulative (various types of power over another person); competitive
(power against another); nurturing (power for another
person); and integrative (power with another person).
Further Reading

Power
One’s capacity to act or to influence the behavior
of others.

May, Rollo. Power and Innocence: A Search for the Sources of
Violence. New York: W. W. Norton, 1972.
Tillich, Paul. Love, Power, and Justice: Ontological Analyses
and Ethical Applications. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1960.

Power may be defined in both personal and interpersonal terms. In the first sense, it refers to one’s physical,
intellectual, or moral capacity to act. In the second, it denotes the ability to influence the behavior of others.
Philosophers have often described power as an integral
facet of human existence. Psychologist Harry Stack Sullivan (1892-1949) has claimed that power is a more crucial motivation than hunger or thirst.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Preconscious
In psychoanalytic theory, knowledge, images, emotions, and other mental phenomena that are not
present in immediate consciousness but are quickly accessible and can be brought into consciousness easily without the use of special techniques.
507

Preconscious

may be accompanied by medication for specific purposes, but medication alone or for extended periods is not
recommended as a course of treatment. Sleeping pills
may help survivors cope in the immediate aftermath of a
trauma, anti-anxiety medications may temporarily ease
emotional distress, and antidepressants may reduce
nightmares, flashbacks, and panic attacks.

Prejudice and discrimination

Sigmund Freud theorized that the human mind was
divided into three parts: the conscious, preconscious, and
unconscious. This schema first appeared in his earliest
model of mental functioning, published in his classic
work, The Interpretation of Dreams (1900). Freud believed that the preconscious functions as an intermediate
or transitional level of the mind—between the unconscious and the conscious—through which repressed material passes.
Freud described this arrangement spatially, depicting
the unconscious as a large room crowded with thoughts
and the conscious area as a smaller reception room, with
a doorkeeper between the two rooms selectively admitting thoughts from the unconscious to the consciousness.
Those thoughts that are restricted to the unconscious area
remain repressed, meaning that they are totally invisible
to the conscious self, and can be recovered only by hypnosis, free association, or some other technique. Not all
thoughts allowed into the “reception area” necessarily become conscious, however. Rather, they become available
for consciousness, with one or another becoming conscious at a given time when attention is drawn to it in
some way. Thus, the smaller room might more properly
be thought of as a preconscious area, in which are gathered all of the thoughts that are not deliberately repressed.
Because of their relative closeness to each other, Freud
actually grouped the conscious and preconscious systems
together in contrast to the unconscious, emphasizing that
thoughts in the conscious and preconscious categories do
not differ in any essential way and can be distinguished
only functionally. A preconscious thought can quickly become conscious by receiving attention, and a conscious
thought can slip into the preconscious when attention is
withdrawn from it.
Further Reading
Firestone, Robert. Psychological Defenses in Everyday Life.
New York: Human Sciences Press, 1989.
Goleman, Daniel. Vital Lies, Simple Truths: the Psychology of
Self-Deception. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1985.

Prejudice and discrimination
A positive or negative attitude toward an individual
based on his or her membership in a religious,
racial, ethnic, political, or other group.

Prejudice has cognitive, affective, and behavioral
components. Based on beliefs, it can affect one’s emotions and behavior, sometimes leading to discrimination.
Prejudiced beliefs primarily take the form of stereotypes,
508

overall impressions based on the assumption that all
members of a group possess similar attributes.
Various theories have been proposed to explain the
causes and dynamics of prejudice. In the 1940s, a University of California study on anti-Semitism and other
forms of prejudice created a profile of a particular personality type—the authoritarian personality—believed
to be associated with prejudice. Persons fitting this
profile are typically raised by strict, emotionally distant parents who exact rigid adherence to rules and
commands. Obedience is ensured through both verbal
and physical punishment, and independent thought
and action are discouraged. As adults, people fitting
this personality type define their world in terms of a
social hierarchy, deferring to persons of higher status
and acting with hostility and contempt toward those
they regard as inferior. They often discriminate against
or overtly persecute those whom they perceive to be of
lower status. It has also been suggested that they may
also be projecting their own weaknesses and fears onto
the groups they denigrate. Other traits associated with
this personality type include strict obedience to rules
and authority, conformity, admiration of powerful figures, and inability to tolerate ambiguity. The California study also found that those who are prejudiced
against one group are likely to be prejudiced against
other groups as well.
Investigators have also studied prejudice as a pattern
of learned attitudes and behaviors. People are not born
prejudiced: many prejudices are formed against groups
with which a person has never had any contact. They acquire prejudiced views by observing and listening to others, particularly one’s parents and other elders. Cultural
influences such as movies and television may also create
or perpetuate stereotypes. The ways in which women,
ethnic groups, and racial minorities are represented in
the media and by the entertainment industry have been
the target of much discussion and criticism. Cognitive
theories have proposed that stereotypes are unavoidable
because they help people categorize and make sense of a
complex and diverse society.
It is a popular belief that prejudices can be overcome by direct contact between people of different backgrounds. However, social psychologists have noted that
contact alone cannot eliminate stereotypes and prejudice—in fact, some types of contact can even reinforce
prejudiced beliefs. For change to occur, contact between
different groups must meet certain conditions: 1) members of the groups should be of equal status. 2) The interaction should move beyond the confines of ritualized interactions (such as those between employer and employee or customer and salesperson) and into personal acquaintance.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Premenstrul syndrome (PMS)

Prejudical attitudes led whites to designate water fountains for “colored” people before the civil rights movement of the
1950s and ‘60s. (The Library of Congress. Reproduced by permission.)

Exposure to persons who dispel or contradict stereotypes about a particular group can also help a prejudiced
person to rethink his views. For example, the growing
willingness of gays to be open about their sexual orientation has helped dispel the stereotype that all gay men are
effeminate. Another important element in overcoming
prejudice is the social support of one’s community. During the civil rights struggles of the 1950s and 1960s, the
lack of community support for desegregation and school
busing further increased prejudiced feelings and behavior among some individuals. Finally, cooperative effort is
an effective way of reducing prejudice. Working together
toward a common goal can bring different groups of people together.
See also Racism
Further Reading
Adorno, Theodor, et al. The Authoritarian Personality. New
York: Harper and Row, 1950.
Allport, Gordon. The Nature of Prejudice. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1954.
Terkel, Studs. Race: How Blacks and Whites Think and Feel
About the American Obsession. New York: New Press,
1992.

Premenstrual syndrome
(PMS)
Symptoms that occur several days before the onset,
and sometimes during the first day of, menstruation.

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) exhibits both physiological and psychological symptoms. The primary
physiological symptoms are water retention and bloating, slightly enlarged and tender breasts, and food cravings. Psychological symptoms include irritability and
depression. The full range of symptoms that have been
attributed to PMS is extremely broad: as many as 150
have been identified. Because the symptoms are so varied from one woman to another (and even within the
same woman at different times) it has been very difficult to arrive at a clinical definition of PMS. In addition, researchers disagree over whether PMS consists
solely of symptoms that disappear completely at the
onset of menstruation or of the premenstrual intensification of symptoms or conditions that are present, although to a lesser degree, during the rest of the month.
Most women with premenstrual syndrome typically

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

509

Primal therapy

suffer from more than one symptom during each menstrual cycle.
Although there is no conclusive evidence that PMS
is caused by hormone imbalances, some women have
been successfully treated by hormonal therapy, which
consists of oral contraceptives and monthly injections of
progesterone. Recent research has linked premenstrual
syndrome to an inadequate number of progesterone receptors or to the failure of those receptors to function
properly, suggesting that PMS may be a disorder of
progesterone response rather than progesterone deficiency. Other studies have posited a link between PMS and
brain opioid (opiate-like) activity, based on alleged similarities between the symptoms of PMS and those of
heroin withdrawal. Regular aerobic exercise, which
helps stabilize opioid levels in the brain, has been shown
to decrease PMS.
The physiological effects of PMS can be reduced
through natural means, including stress management, dietary changes, acupressure massage, yoga, regular exercise, and adequate rest. Nutritional supplements, such as
vitamins A, E, and B-6 have been shown to aid in the
treatment of PMS, as have calcium and magnesium.
Some physicians prescribe diuretics to treat water retention or tranquilizers for the treatment of irritability and
mood swings. Recent research has suggested that drugs
which increase the brain’s serotonin levels, such Prozac,
may also be helpful in treating PMS.
Although PMS has received much attention from
the medical establishment, some women’s health experts
believe that its severity and significance have been exaggerated, and claim that only a small percentage of women
have premenstrual symptoms so disabling that it interferes with work or other aspects of their lives. They also
contend that the increased awareness of PMS contributes
to a cultural bias that disproportionately attributes a
woman’s fluctuations in mood to her menstrual cycle,
when the moods of both males and females will fluctuate
within the course of a month for many reasons—both
physiological and environmental—that have nothing to
do with menstruation. In a recent investigation into the
link between a woman’s psychological characteristics and
premenstrual syndrome, it was noted that whether or not
women report PMS has less to do with the number and
severity of their actual symptoms than with their general
outlook on life, including levels of self-esteem and the
ability to express feelings and manage stress.

Primal therapy
A therapeutic technique that claims to cure psychological disorders by encouraging people to feel
deeply the pain and trauma they experienced very
early in life.

Primal therapy was pioneered by Dr. Arthur Janov in
the late 1960s. Janov describes it as a “natural therapy”
based on his hypothesis that most psychological disturbances are disorders of feeling which can be traced back
to the traumas of conception and childbirth. The theoretical basis for the therapy is the supposition that prenatal
experiences and birth trauma form people’s primary impressions of life and that they subsequently influence the
direction our lives take. The “natural” part of the theory
is based on Janov’s belief that these early primary experiences imprint on the human central nervous system,
creating physiological and psychological problems in the
future. Primal therapy is designed to enable clients to reexperience those critical moments. By doing so, it is assumed that underlying tensions are released, problems
are alleviated, and psychological and physiological well
being are restored.
The component of primal therapy with which most
people are familiar is “The Primal Scream”—also the
title of Janov’s first book on primal therapy (New York:
Perigee Books, 1970). The book describes how, with primal therapy, clients are encouraged to fully feel their
original traumas (namely those of birth and conception)
and to scream in response to the intense pain these “repressed memories” are thought to elicit. These memories
are believed to be so intense that they can only be expressed with loud screaming. The process is best undertaken in a safe and controlled environment—a room with
dim lighting, a padded floor, and padded walls.

Further Reading

Using these techniques, Janov claims that primal
therapy reduces or eliminates a host of physical and psychological ailments in a relatively short time with lasting
results. In fact, Janov reports that ridding the mind of socalled repressed early childhood or infant traumas has
been scientifically linked to the reduction of many serious medical problems including stress, anxiety, depression, sleep disorders, high blood pressure, cancer, drug
and alcohol addiction, sexual difficulties, phobias, obsessions, ulcers, migraines, asthma, and arthritis. Unfortunately, there exists no scientific evidence to support these
claims; Janov’s assertions of scientific linkage are based
on uncontrolled case histories and personal observations.

Dalton, Katharina. PMS: the Essential Guide to Treatment Options. London, Eng.: Thorsons, 1994.
PMS: It’s Not in Your Head. [videorecording] Omaha, NB: Envision Communications, 1993.

Truth be known, primal therapy cannot be defended
on scientifically established principles. This is not surprising considering its questionable theoretical rationale.

510

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In Dr. Janov’s latest book, The Biology of Love, primal therapy is discussed in the context of neuroanatomy
and neurochemistry. This relationship is, however, scientifically tenuous. For example, although it is accepted
among neuroscientists that working yourself into a frenzy
and screaming can lead to the subsequent release of endorphins that produce feelings of relaxation and wellbeing, there is no evidence to support Janov’s assertion
that this relaxation can be attributable to the release of repressed memories. A far more likely explanation is that
the endorphins are released, much like in “runner’s high,”
in response to the strenuous activity involved. Primal
therapy remains essentially unaltered from what it was 30
years ago—a creative theory and an interesting approach
to therapy, but one lacking scientific substantiation.
Timothy Moore
Further Reading
Cunningham, J. “Primal therapies—stillborn theories.” In
Feltham, C. et al., eds. Controversies in Psychotherapy
and Counselling. London; Sage Publications Ltd., 1999,
25-33.
Janov, A. The Biology of Love. Amherst: Prometheus Books,
2000.

Programmed learning
A method of self-instruction that enlists machines
or specially prepared books to teach information.

Originally introduced in the mid-1950s by behaviorist B.F. Skinner, programmed instruction is a system
whereby the learner uses specially prepared books or
equipment to learn without a teacher. It was intended to
free teachers from burdensome drills and repetitive problem-solving inherent in teaching basic academic subjects
like spelling, arithmetic, and reading. Skinner based his
ideas on the principle of operant conditioning, which
theorized that learning takes place when a reinforcing
stimulus is presented to reward a correct response. In
early programmed instruction, students punched answers
to simple math problems into a type of keyboard. If the
answer was correct, the machine would advance to another problem. Incorrect answers would not advance.
Skinner believed such learning could, in fact, be superior
to traditional teacher-based instruction because children
were rewarded immediately and individually for correct
answers rather than waiting for a teacher to correct written answers or respond verbally. Programmed instruction
quickly became popular and spawned much educational
research and commercial enterprise in the production of
programmed instructional materials. It is considered the
antecedent of modern computer-assisted learning.
Two types of programmed learning can be compared. Linear programming involves a simple step-bystep procedure. There is a single set of materials and students work from one problem to the next until the end of
the program. Branching programming is more complex.
Students choose from multiple-choice answers and then
are prompted to proceed to another page of the book depending on their answer. If a correct answer is given, students move on to another page with more information to
learn and more questions to answer. An incorrect answer
leads to comments on why the answer is incorrect and a
direction to return to the original question to make another selection.
Just as the programming developed more complexity over the years, so did the teaching machines themselves. Early, simple machines were little more than
electronic workbooks. Later machines allowed students
to be instructed on more complex material that required
more than one-word or one-number responses. In some,
students could write their responses and move ahead by
comparing their answers to acceptable answers. Programmed-learning books differ from traditional workbooks because they actually teach new information
through this step-by-step stimulus-response method
rather than simply offering practice material for alreadylearned skills.
Research has shown that programmed learning often
is as successful, and sometimes more successful, than
traditional teacher-based learning because it recognizes
the different abilities and needs of individual children.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

511

Programmed learning

For instance, clinicians at one Canadian psychotherapy
clinic specializing in primal therapy make the claim that,
if a child is conceived through rape, the mother’s egg and
the father’s sperm are “imprinted with the specific feeling
state about the incident and pass this ‘memory’ on to the
child’s every cell.” This supposedly causes the child a
lifetime of pain and psychological trouble unless he or
she learns to express his or her real feelings about the
memory of this event. Evidence from research on memory and emotions, however, does not support the existence
of retrievable memories of birth trauma. In short, “cellular” memories of conception are a scientific fiction.
Moreover, even if infant memories were retrievable, there
is no evidence to suggest that they should have such a disproportionate impact on people’s lives. A recent survey of
the opinions of 300 clinicians and researchers regarding
psychotherapeutic techniques revealed that primal therapy was the technique whose soundness was most often
questioned. Likewise, an evaluation of primal therapy
commissioned by German courts concluded that primal
therapy is not a valid therapeutic technique.

Projective techniques

Students who have mastered the material can move
ahead more quickly, while those who need more practice
are repeatedly exposed to the problems. Programmed
learning also allows teachers more time to concentrate
on more complex tasks. One criticism of programmed
learning centers on the lack of student-teacher interaction. It has been shown that some students thrive more
fully with the human motivation inherent in more traditional learning situations.
Further Reading
Bower, Gordon H., and Ernest R. Hilgard. Theories of Learning. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1981.

Projective techniques
Unstructured tests used for personality assessment
that rely on the subject’s interpretation of ambiguous stimuli.

Projective techniques involve asking subjects to interpret or fill in visual stimuli, complete sentences, or report what associations particular words bring to mind.
Because of the leeway provided by the tests, subjects
project their own personalities onto the stimulus, often
revealing personal conflicts, motivations, coping styles,
and other characteristics.
The best known projective test is the Rorschach test,
created in the 1920s by Swiss psychologist Hermann
Rorschach (1884-1922). It consists of a series of 10
cards, each containing a complicated inkblot. Some are
in black and white, some in color. Subjects are asked to
describe what they see in each card. Test scores are
based on several parameters: 1) what part of the blot a
person focuses on; 2) what particular details determine
the response; 3) the content of the responses (what objects, persons, or situations they involve); and 4) the frequency with which a particular response has been given
by previous test takers. A number of different scoring
methods have been devised for the Rorschach test, some
aimed at providing greater objectivity and validity for
this highly impressionistic form of assessment. However,
many psychologists still interpret the test freely according to their subjective impressions. Some also take into
account the subject’s demeanor while taking the test (cooperative, anxious, defensive, etc.).
Another widely used projective test is the Thematic
Apperception Test (TAT) introduced at Harvard University in 1935 by Henry Murray. Test takers look at a series of up to 20 pictures of people in a variety of recognizable settings and construct a story about what is happening in each one. They are asked to describe not only
512

what is happening at the moment shown in the picture
but also what events led up to the present situation and
what the characters are thinking and feeling. They are
encouraged to interpret the pictures as freely and imaginatively as they want and to be completely open and
honest in their responses. As with the Rorschach test, the
psychologist often interprets the test results subjectively,
focusing on any recurring themes in responses to the different pictures. However, scoring methods have also
been developed that focus on specific aspects of the subjects’ responses, including aggression, expression of
needs, and perceptions of reality.
Still another type of projective technique is the sentence completion test. Many tests of this type have been
developed, some of which investigate particular personality features. Others are designed specifically for children or adolescents. Subjects are asked to complete sentences with such open-ended beginnings as “I wish . . .”
or “My mother . . .” Although the same sentence beginnings are shown to different test takers, there are no
norms for comparing their answers to those of previous
subjects. Still other types of projective tests have been
developed, including some that ask the subject to create
drawings or complete a story.
Compared to the more objective questionnaire-type
personality assessments, projective tests are difficult to
score, and questions are often raised about their degree
of reliability and validity. In most cases, not enough research has been done on such tests to determine scientifically how effective they actually are in assessing personality. Results of the Thematic Apperception Test obtained by different scorers have proven relatively reliable
when specific features (such as aggression) are measured. However, the reliability of the Rorschach test,
which has also been researched, has generally proven
unsatisfactory because test results are dependent on the
psychologist’s judgment. Different interpretations of the
same set of responses may vary significantly. Although
newer scoring systems—including one that allows for
computer scoring—may yield greater reliability, free interpretation of the test is valuable to clinicians.
In addition to their weaknesses in terms of reliability
and validation, projective tests also require more time and
skill to administer than more objective testing methods.
However, they continue to be employed because of their
usefulness in helping psychologists obtain a comprehensive picture of an individual’s personality. The results are
most useful when combined with information obtained
from personal observation, other test scores, and familiarity with a client’s previous history. In addition, projective
tests make it especially difficult for subjects to skew their
answers in a particular direction as they sometimes attempt to do with other types of assessment.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Psychiatry/Psychiatrist

Further Reading

A physician who specializes in the diagnosis and
treatment of mental disorders.

Cronbach, L.J. Essentials of Psychological Testing. New York:
Harper and Row, 1970.
Sundberg, N. The Assessment of Persons. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1977.

Psyche
In psychology, an individual’s consciousness.

The term psyche actually takes its meaning from ancient myth. In Roman mythology, Psyche represented
the human spirit and was portrayed as a beautiful girl
with butterfly wings. Psyche was a beautiful mortal desired by Cupid, to the dismay of Cupid’s mother Venus.
Venus demanded that her son order Psyche to fall in love
with the ugliest man in the world. Cupid refused and
loved Psyche himself, visiting her only by night and
commanding that she not look at him. Eventually, Psyche broke Cupid’s rule and lit a lamp to look upon his
face. For this disloyalty, Cupid abandoned her and Psyche wandered through the world in search of her lover.
Eventually she was reunited with Cupid and made immortal by Jupiter.
The modern day use of the concept of psyche still
incorporates the meaning of the human soul or spirit. It
can also refer to the mind. Many different branches of
science may have an interest in studying matters of the
psyche. An online academic journal titled Psyche illustrates the wide range of study around the concept of psyche; participants come from the fields of cognitive science, philosophy, psychology, physics, neuroscience,
and artificial intelligence. The magazine refers to its
mission as an “interdisciplinary exploration of the nature
of consciousness and its relation to the brain.” Topics
discussed regarding psyche in this diverse forum have included animal consciousness, the visual brain, and the
triangular circuit of attention.
Psychiatrist Carl Jung (1875–1961) believed that
the psyche was self regulating, and that it became more
defined as a person went through the process of “individuation.” Jung’s theories, which he called analytical psychology, also included recognition and exploration of a
“collective unconsciousness.”
Catherine Dybiec Holm

Psychiatrists treat patients privately and in hospital
settings through a combination of psychotherapy and
medication. There are about 41,000 practicing psychiatrists in the United States. Their training consists of four
years of medical school, followed by one year of internship and at least three years of psychiatric residency.
Psychiatrists may receive certification from the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology (ABPN), which
requires two years of clinical experience beyond residency and the successful completion of a written and an oral
test. Unlike a medical license, board certification is not
legally required in order to practice psychiatry.
Psychiatrists may practice general psychiatry or
choose a specialty, such as child psychiatry, geriatric
psychiatry, treatment of substance abuse, forensic (legal)
psychiatry, emergency psychiatry, mental retardation,
community psychiatry, or public health. Some focus
their research and clinical work primarily on psychoactive medication, in which case they are referred to as
psychopharmacologists. Psychiatrists may be called
upon to address numerous social issues, including juvenile delinquency, family and marital dysfunction, legal
competency in criminal and financial matters, and treatment of mental and emotional problems among prison
inmates and in the military.
Psychiatrists treat the biological, psychological, and
social components of mental illness simultaneously.
They can investigate whether symptoms of mental disorders have physical causes, such as a hormone imbalance
or an adverse reaction to medication, or whether psychological symptoms are contributing to physical conditions, such as cardiovascular problems and high blood
pressure. Because they are licensed physicians, psychiatrists, unlike psychologists and psychiatric social workers, can prescribe medication; they are also able to admit
patients to the hospital. Other mental health professionals who cannot prescribe medication themselves often
establish a professional relationship with a psychiatrist.
Psychiatrists may work in private offices, private
psychiatric hospitals, community hospitals, state and
federal hospitals, or community mental centers. Often,
they combine work in several settings. As of 1988, 15
percent of psychiatrists belonged to group practices. In
addition to their clinical work, psychiatrists often engage
in related professional activities, including teaching, research, and administration. The American Psychiatric
Association, the oldest medical specialty organization in

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

513

Psychiatry/Psychiatrist

See also Holtzman inkblot technique; Rorschach
technique

Psychoactive drugs

the United States, supports the profession by offering
continuing education and research opportunities, keeping members informed about new research and public
policy issues, helping to educate the public about mental
health issues, and serving as an advocate for people affected by mental illness.
Traditional psychiatry has been challenged in a variety of ways since the end of World War II. The most
widespread and significant change has been the removal
of the psychiatric hospital from its central role in the
practice of psychiatry. This development resulted from a
number of factors: the financial inability of state governments to remedy the deteriorating condition of many institutions; the discovery of new, more effective drugs enabling patients to medicate themselves at home; social
activists’ charges of abuse and neglect in state mental facilities; and activism by former mental patients protesting involuntary institutionalization and treatment. In
addition, a growing movement, led by Karl Menninger,
sought to replace state mental hospitals with community mental health centers. The Community Mental Health
Centers Act of 1963 allotted federal funds for the establishment of community treatment centers, which provide
a variety of services, including short-term and partial
hospitalization. The establishment of these centers has
contributed to the growing trend toward the deinstitutionalization of mental patients.
In the 1960s and 1970s radical critics within the
profession, such as Thomas Szasz and R. D. Laing,
challenged basic assumptions about psychiatric treatment and about the medical model of mental illness itself. Sociologists, including Erving Goffman and
Thomas Scheff, produced critiques of mental institutions
as a form of social control, and the anti-psychiatry ideas
of French philosopher Michel Foucault gained currency
among American intellectuals. Psychiatry also came
under fire from the feminist movement, which saw it as a
vehicle for controlling women. Feminist authors Kate
Millett and Shulamith Firestone have portrayed psychoanalysis as instrumental in suppressing the original feminist movement of the late 19th and early 20th centuries
by labeling women’s legitimate dissatisfaction and agitation as hysteria and providing an intellectual theory that
aided in legitimizing society’s continuing subordination
of women. Published in 1972, Phyllis Chesler’s Women
and Madness was a landmark in feminist criticism.
Advances in neuroscience, endocrinology, and immunology have had a major effect on the way psychiatry
is practiced today. The study of neurotransmitters—
chemicals in the brain that are related to anxiety, depression, and other disorders—have been significant
both in the development of new medications and in the
way psychiatrists think about mood, personality, and
514

behavior. Currently, a major (and highly publicized)
issue in psychiatry is the use of Prozac and other specialized serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), a new class
of antidepressants that has fewer side effects than drugs
previously used to treat depression. These drugs have become controversial because of their potential use for
“cosmetic psychopharmacology,” the transformation of
mood and personality in persons with no diagnosable
mental disorder. Both psychiatrists and others in the
medical and mental health professions must confront the
issue of using psychoactive drugs as “mood brighteners” to make clinically healthy individuals more energetic, assertive, and resilient.
Another contemporary development with wideranging implications for psychiatry is the growth of
health maintenance organizations (HMOs) and managed
care programs, whose cost-containment policies have already had a significant effect on the way psychiatry is
practiced. Expensive long-term psychotherapy is discouraged by such organizations, and medication is generally favored over therapy. Recently, concern has been
expressed over the practice of promoting cheaper medications over more expensive ones, even when those that
cost more offer greater benefits.
Further Reading
Coles, Robert. The Mind’s Fate: A Psychiatrist Looks at His
Profession. Boston: Little, Brown and Co., 1995.
Kramer, Peter D. Listening to Prozac: A Psychiatrist Explores
Antidepressant Drugs and the Remaking of the Self. New
York: Viking, 1993.
Laing, R. D. Wisdom, Madness, and Folly: The Making of a
Psychiatrist. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1985.

Psychoactive drugs
Medications used to treat mental illness and brain
disorders.

Overview and use
The role of psychoactive drugs, also called psychotherapeutic agents or psychotropic drugs, in the treatment of mental illness is dependent on the disorder for
which they are prescribed. In cases where mental illness
is considered biological in nature, such as with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder or schizophrenia, pharmaceutical therapy with psychotherapeutic drugs is recommended as a primary method of treatment. In other cases, such
as in personality disorder or dissociative disorder, psychoactive medications are usually considered a secondary, companion treatment (or adjunct) to a type of
psychotherapy, such as cognitive-behavioral therapy. In

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Psychoactive drugs can be classified into seven
major categories. These include:
• Antianxiety agents. Drugs used to treat anxiety disorders and symptoms. These include benzodiazepines
such as alprazolam (Xanax), lorazepam (Ativan), diazepam (Valium), and chlordiazepoxide (Librium), and
other medications including buspirone (BuSpar) and
paroxetine (Paxil).
• Antidepressants. Prescribed to treat major depressive
disorder, dysthymic disorder, and bipolar disorder. Popular antidepressants include venlafaxine (Effexor), nefazodone (Serzone), bupropion (Wellbutrin), MAOI inhibitors such as phenelzine (Nardil) and tranylcypromine (Parnate); selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) such as fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine
(Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft); tricyclic antidepressants
such as amitriptyline (Elavil), doxepin hydrochloride
(Sinequan), desipramine (Norpramin), and perphenazine/amitriptyline combinations (Etrafon).
• Antimanic agents. This category includes medications
used to treat mania associated with bipolar disorder (or
manic-depressive disorder) such as divalproex sodium
(Depakote) and lithium carbonate (Lithium, Eskalith,
Lithobid, Tegrator).
• Antipanic agents. Prescribed to treat the panic symptoms that are a defining feature of many anxiety disorders. Medications include clonazepam (Klonopin),
paroxetine (Paxil), alprazolam (Xanax), and sertraline
(Zoloft).
• Antipsychotic agents. Also known as neuroleptic
agents, these medications are used to manage psychosis related to schizophrenia, delusional disorder,
and brief psychotic disorder. They include clozapine
(Clozaril), haloperidol (Haldol), loxapine (Loxitane),
molindone (Moban), thiothixene (Navane), risperidone
(Risperdal), and olanzapine (Zyprexa); also includes
phenothiazines such as prochlorperazine (Compazine),
trifluoperazine hydrochloride (Stelazine), and chlorpromazine (Thorazine).
• Obsessive-compulsive disorder medications. Drugs used
to treat OCD include fluvoxamine (Luvox), paroxetine
(Paxil), fluoxetine (Prozac), and sertraline (Zoloft).
• Psychostimulants. Also known as central nervous system stimulants, these medications are used to treat attention deficit disorders (ADD and ADHD) and narcolepsy. They include methylphenidate hydrochloride
(Methylin, Ritalin) and methaamphetamines (Desoxyn,
Dexedrine, and DextroStat).

Side effects
There are a number of side-effects associated with
psychotherapeutic agents. These can include, and are not
limited to, dry mouth, drowsiness, disorientation, delirium, agitation, tremor, irregular heartbeat, headache, insomnia, gastrointestinal distress, nausea, menstrual irregularity, weight gain, weight loss, loss of sex drive, skin
rashes, and sweating. Patients should inform their
healthcare provider if they experience any of these side
effects. In some cases, a dosage adjustment or change of
prescription can alleviate any discomfort caused by
them. Additional medications may also be prescribed to
address severe side effects (e.g., anticholinergic medication may be prescribed for muscle spasms caused by antipsychotic medications).
Tardive dyskinesia, a condition characterized by involuntary movements of the mouth and other locations
on the body, has been reported in some patients who take
antipsychotic medication on a long-term basis. In some
cases, the condition is permanent, although discontinuing or changing medication may halt or reverse it in
some patients.
Agranulocytosis, a potentially serious illness in
which the white blood cells that typically fight infection
in the body are destroyed, is a possible side effect of
clozapine, another antipsychotic. Patients taking this
medication should undergo weekly blood tests to monitor their white blood cell counts.

Precautions
Psychotherapeutic agents can be contraindicated
(not recommended for use) in patients with certain medical conditions. They may also interact with other prescription and over-the-counter medications, either magnifying or reducing the intended effects of one or both
drugs. In some circumstances, they can trigger serious,
even life-threatening, physical side effects. For this reason, individuals who are prescribed psychoactive medication should inform their mental healthcare provider
and any other prescribing doctor of all medications they
are taking, and of any medical conditions they have not
yet disclosed.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) such as
tranylcypromine (Parnate) and phenelzine (Nardil) block
the action of monoamine oxidase (MAO), a chemical
agent of the central nervous system. Patients who are
prescribed MAOIs must eliminate foods high in tyramine (found in aged cheeses, red wines, and meats) from
their diets to avoid potentially serious hypotensive side
effects.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

515

Psychoactive drugs

these situations, medication is used to provide temporary
symptom relief while the patient works on the issues
leading to his illness with a therapist or other mental
health professional.

Psychoanalysis

Patients taking Lithium, an antimanic medication,
must carefully monitor their salt intake. Diarrhea, sweating, fever, change in diet, or anything else that lowers the
level of sodium in their system can result in a toxic build
up of Lithium, which can result in slurred speech, confusion, irregular heart beat, vomiting, blurred vision, and
possibly death.
Certain psychoactive drugs are lethal in excessive
doses, and therefore may not be a viable treatment option for patients at risk for suicide unless they can be dispensed in a controlled manner.
Many psychoactive drugs are contraindicated in
pregnancy, particularly in the first trimester. Patients
should check with their doctor about the risks associated
with psychotherapeutic medications and possible treatment options when planning a pregnancy.
Paula Ford-Martin
Further Reading
Medical Economics Company. The Physicians Desk Reference
(PDR). 54th edition. Montvale, NJ: Medical Economics
Company, 2000.

from a Viennese contemporary the idea of getting a patient to simply talk about his or her problems. Freud expanded upon this practice, however, by creating the idea
of “free association,” in which a patient is encouraged to
speak in a non-narrative, non-directed manner, with the
hope that he or she will eventually reveal/uncover the
unconscious heart of the problem. This sort of unbridled, undirected self-exploration became one of the signature tenets of psychoanalysis.
Continuing his research of the mind and the unconscious, Freud published The Interpretation of Dreams in
1900. In this work he outlined his ideas about the construction of the mind and human personality. This book was
followed by the now basics of the Freudian canon: The
Psychopathology of Everyday Life in 1904 and A Case of
Hysteria and Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality, both
in 1905. By the second decade of the 20th century, Freud
had become an internationally renowned thinker, and psychoanalysis had emerged as a significant intellectual
achievement on par with the work of Albert Einstein in
physics and in many ways comparable to the modernist
movement in the visual arts. Psychoanalysis was in its
prime and it became something of a fad to undergo psychoanalytic treatment among the Western world’s elite.

Further Information
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). 6001 Executive
Boulevard, Rm. 8184, MSC 9663, Bethesda, MD, USA.
20892-9663, fax: (301)443-4279, (301)443-4513. Email:
nimhinfo@nih.gov. http://www.nimh.nih.gov.

Psychoanalysis
A method of treatment for mental, emotional, and
behavioral dysfunctions as developed by Sigmund
Freud.

Developed in Vienna, Austria, by Sigmund Freud
(1856-1939), psychoanalysis is based on an approach in
which the therapist helps the patient better understand
him- or herself through examination of the deep personal
feelings, relationships, and events that have shaped motivations and behavior. Freud developed his theories during the end of the 19th and the early part of the 20th centuries in Vienna, Austria, where he was a practicing
physician specializing in neurological disorders. Freud’s
interest originated in his medical practice when he encountered patients who were clearly suffering physical
symptoms for which he could find no organic, or biological, cause. Freud’s first attempt to get at the psychological cause of these patients’ pain was through hypnosis,
which he studied in Paris in 1885. He found the results to
be less than he’d hoped, however, and soon borrowed
516

Psychoanalysis and the development of
personality
Freud believed that human personality was constructed of three parts: the id, the ego, and the superego.
The id, according to this schema, is comprised largely of
instinctual drives—for food and sex, for instance. These
drives are essentially unconscious and result in satisfaction when they are fulfilled and frustration and anxiety
when they are thwarted. The ego is linked to the id, but is
the component that has undergone socialization and
which recognizes that instant gratification of the id urges
is not always possible. The superego acts in many ways
like the ego, as a moderator of behavior; but whereas the
ego moderates urges based on social constraints, the
superego operates as an arbiter of right and wrong. It
moderates the id’s urges based on a moral code. Having
theorized this framework of human personality, Freud
used it to demonstrate how instinctual drives are inevitably confounded with strictly social codes (by the
ego) and by notions of morality (by the superego). This
conflict, psychoanalytic theory supposes, is at the heart
of anxiety and neuroses.
In dealing with these conflicts, Freud’s psychoanalytic theory suggests that the human mind constructs
three forms of adaptive mechanisms: namely, defense
mechanisms, neurotic symptoms, and dreams. Freud believed dreams were vivid representations of repressed

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Psychoanalytic theory also sees various neurotic
symptoms as symbolic acts representing the repressed
longings of the id. For Freud, a neurotic symptom was
what we now consider a psychosomatic disorder, some
physical symptom that has a psychological, or in Freud’s
terms, neurological, origin. Psychoanalytic theory suggests that conditions like blindness, paralysis, and severe
headaches can result from unfulfilled longings that the
patient is unable to confront on a conscious level. Because of this inability, the patient develops some acceptable symptom, such as headaches, for which he or she
can then seek medical attention.
The final adaptive mechanism Freud suggested are
defense mechanisms. Freud identified several defense
mechanisms, such as repression, displacement, denial,
rationalization, projection, and identification. Each has
its own peculiar dynamic but all work to distance a person from a conflict that is too difficult to confront realistically. These conflicts, according to psychoanalytic theory, originate during one of the four developmental
stages Freud identified. These stages, and the infantile
sexuality he identified as occurring within them, are
some of the most controversial aspects of psychoanalytic
theory. Freud suggested that adult neuroses was a result
of and could be traced back to frustrated sexual gratification during these stages, which are: the oral stage, birth
to one year; the anal stage, 1-3 years; the phallic stage,
3-5 years; and latency, five years to puberty. Each of
these stages is in turn divided into sub-stages. In each of
the major stages, the infant has sexual needs which, because of social mores, are left largely unfulfilled, causing
neuroses to originate.
It is during the phallic stage that Freud hypothesized
the development of the Oedipus complex, easily the
most renowned and controversial theoretical construction of the Freudian canon. The Oedipus complex suggests that during the phallic stage, a child begins associating his genitals with sexual pleasure and becomes erotically attracted to the parent of the opposite sex while at
the same time developing an intense jealousy of the
same-sex parent. While Freud’s original theory excludes
consideration of females, his contemporary, Carl Jung
(1875-1961), expanded this particular dynamic and theorized an Electra complex for women in which the same
psychodrama of erotic attraction and jealousy is played
out from the young girl’s point of view.

Freud’s critics
From nearly the beginning, Freud and his construction of psychoanalytic theory have faced intense criticism. His most famous dissenter is Jung, his former disciple. Jung split with Freud in 1913 over a variety of issues, including, but certainly not limited to, Freud’s emphasis on infantile sexuality. Jung had a different view of
the construction of human personality, for instance, and
had different ideas about how dreams should be interpreted and viewed as part of psychoanalysis. Alfred
Adler, another disciple of Freud, broke with the master
over infantile sexuality, positing a view that infants and
children are driven primarily by a need for self-affirmation rather than sexual gratification. In modern times,
Freud has been the target of criticism from many corners. Feminists especially criticize his understanding of
“hysteria” and his theory of Oedipal conflict.
Freudian psychoanalysis focuses on uncovering unconscious motivations and breaking down defenses.
Many therapists feel that psychoanalysis is the most effective technique to identify and deal with internal conflicts and feelings that contribute to dysfunctional behavior. Through psychoanalysis, the patient increases his
understanding of himself and his internal conflicts so
that they will no longer exert as much influence on mental and emotional health.
Further Reading
Hall, Calvin S. A Primer of Freudian Psychology. New York:
Harper and Row, 1982.
Menninger, K. and P.S. Holzman. Theory of Psychoanalytic
Technique. New York: Basic Book, 1973.
Mitchell, Juliet. Psychoanalysis and Feminism. New York: Vintage Book, 1975.

Psychodrama
See Role playing/psychodrama

Psychological Abstracts
Monthly journal published by the American Psychological Association.

Founded in 1927, Psychological Abstracts contains
nonevaluative summary abstracts of literature in the
field of psychology and related disciplines, which are
grouped into 22 major classification categories. It includes summaries of technical reports as well as journal

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

517

Psychological Abstracts

urges: the id speaking out in wildly incongruous nighttime parables. He considered dreams to have two parts,
the manifest content, the narrative that one is able to remember upon waking, and the latent content, the underlying, largely symbolic message. Because Freud believed dreams to represent unfulfilled longings of the id,
psychoanalysis deals heavily with dream interpretation.

Psychological disorder

articles and books. Each edition is collected into a cumulative volume every six months, with an index listing
both the volume’s contents and the national and international journals in which the abstracted literature appear.
These journals are cited within the volume by codes listed in each monthly issue. A table of contents near the
beginning of each issue guides readers to broad general
areas that they may wish to investigate, while the subject indexes in the cumulative volumes refers them to
articles on a particular topic.
In addition to research articles, Psychological Abstracts features theoretical discussions and reviews of
other investigations, and alsocontains an author index for
readers who would like to follow up their research by
studying additional articles or books by a given author.
PsycLIT®, the CD-ROM version of Psychological
Abstracts, became available in 1993, and is used by
many academic and large public libraries. PsycLIT®, a
two-CD set which is updated quarterly, includes over
670,000 records. PsycLIT® indexes and abstracts articles dating from 1973 from 1,300 professional journals.
The database also indexes and abstracts books and book
chapters dating from 1987.
Further Information
EBSCO Publishing. 10 Estes Street, Ispwich, MA 01938,
(800) 653–2726.

Psychological disorder
A condition characterized by patterns of thought,
emotion, or behavior that are maladaptive, disruptive, or uncomfortable either for the person affected or for others.

While psychological disorders are generally signaled by some form of abnormal behavior or thought
process, abnormality can be difficult to define, especially since it varies from culture to culture. Psychologists have several standard approaches to defining abnormality for diagnostic purposes. One is the statistical
approach, which evaluates behavior by determining
how closely it conforms to or deviates from that of the
majority of people. Behavior may also be evaluated by
whether it conforms to social rules and cultural norms,
an approach that avoids condemning nonconformists as
abnormal for behavior that, while unusual, may not violate social standards and may even be valued in their
culture. Yet another way to gauge the normality of behavior is by whether it is adaptive or maladaptive—and
to what extent it interferes with the conduct of everyday
life. In some situations, psychologists may also evalu518

ate normality solely on the basis of whether or not a
person is made unhappy or uncomfortable by his or her
own behavior.
The official standard for the classification of psychological disorders is the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, whose most recent edition is also referred to
as DSM-IV. Its five dimensions, or axes for evaluating
behavior and thought patterns, provide a thorough context in which to assess an individual’s psychological
profile. Axis I lists major mental disorders that may affect a patient. Axis II is for assessing of personality
disorders—lifelong, deeply ingrained patterns of behavior that are destructive to those who display them or
to others. Axis III deals with any organic medical problems that may be present. The fourth axis includes any
environmental or psychosocial factors affecting a person’s condition (such as the loss of a loved one, sexual
abuse, divorce, career changes, poverty, or homelessness). In Axis V, the diagnostician assesses the person’s
level of functioning within the previous 12 months on a
scale of one to 100.
Conditions that would formerly have been described
as neurotic are now found in five Axis I classifications:
anxiety disorders, somatoform disorders, dissociative
disorders, mood disorders, and sexual disorders. Anxiety
disorders—conditions involving longstanding, intense,
or disruptive anxiety—are the most common of psychological disorders among Americans. These include phobias (a strong fear of a specific object or situation); generalized anxiety (a diffuse, free-floating anxiety); panic
disorder (an acute anxiety attack often accompanied by
agoraphobia, or fear of being separated from a safe
place); and obsessive-compulsive disorder (a repetitive,
uncontrollable behavior triggered by persistent, unwanted thoughts).
Somatoform disorders are characterized by psychological problems that take a physical, or somatic,
form. A person suffering from a somatoform disorder
will show persistent physical symptoms for which no
physiological cause can be found. Included among
these disorders are hypochondriasis (a strong, unjustified fear of contracting a serious disease); pain disorder (severe pain with no apparent physical cause); and
somatization disorder (complaints about a variety of
physical problems). Another somatoform condition,
conversion disorder (formerly called conversion hysteria), is characterized by apparent blindness, deafness,
paralysis, or insensitivity to pain with no physiological
cause. Conversion disorders, which are most prevalent
in adolescence or early adulthood, are usually accompanied by some form of severe stress and often appear
to elicit surprisingly little concern in the patient. Disso-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Mood disorders (also called affective disorders), are
characterized by extremes of mood, abnormal mood
fluctuations, or inconsistency between mood and the surrounding events or environment. The two leading mood
disorders are depression and bipolar disorder. Major
depressive disorder is characterized by feelings and behaviors that many people experience at times—sadness,
guilt, fatigue, loss of appetite—but it is distinguished by
their persistence and severity. Major depression may be
accompanied by feelings of inadequacy and worthlessness, weight loss or gain, sleep disturbances, difficulty
concentrating and making decisions, and, in the most severe cases, delusions and suicidal impulses. Depression
is a major problem in the United States; one-third of all
psychiatric outpatients suffer from depression. The percentage of Americans who will experience at least one
major depressive episode during their lives has been estimated at between eight and 12 percent for men and between 20 and 26 percent for women. Bipolar disorder
(also known as manic depression) is characterized by the
alternation of depression with mania, an abnormally active and elated emotional state in which a person becomes overly optimistic, energetic, and convinced of his
or her own powers and abilities. Manic episodes can result in impulsive and unwise decisions, and may even
pose physical dangers.
The DSM-IV list of mental disorders also includes
psychotic disorders, which are severe conditions characterized by abnormalities in thinking, false beliefs, and
other symptoms indicating a highly distorted perception
of reality and severe interference with the capacity to
function normally. Probably the best known of these disorders is schizophrenia, which seriously disrupts communication and other normal functions, including profound disturbances in thinking, emotion, perception, and
behavior. About one percent of Americans suffer from
schizophrenia. Other mental disorders listed in DSM-IV
include eating and sleep disorders; impulse control and
adjustment disorders; substance-related disorders; cognitive disorders, such as delirium, and dementia; and
disorders usually diagnosed in infancy, childhood, or
adolescence, such as hyperactivity, mental retardation,
and autism. Personality disorders, which are listed in
Axis II of DSM-IV, include narcissistic, dependent,
avoidant, and antisocial personality types. This axis also
includes developmental disorders in children.

Psychology/Psychologist

ciative disorders involve the fragmentation, or dissociation, of personality components that are usually integrated, such as memory, consciousness, or even identity itself. These disorders include amnesia, dissociative
identity disorder, and dissociative fugue (in which
amnesia is accompanied by assumption of a new identity in a new location).

Psychological testing
See Assessment, psychological

Psychology/Psychologist
The science which studies behavior and mental
processes.

As psychology has grown and changed throughout
its history, it has been defined in numerous ways. As
early as 400 B.C., the ancient Greeks philosophized
about the relationship of personality characteristics to
physiological traits. Since then, philosophers have proposed theories to explain human behavior. In the late
1800s the emergence of scientific method gave the
study of psychology a new focus. In 1879, the first psychological laboratory was opened in Leipzig, Germany,
by Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920), and soon afterwards
the first experimental studies of memory were published. Wundt was instrumental in establishing psychology as the study of conscious experience, which he
viewed as made up of elemental sensations. In addition
to the type of psychology practiced by Wundt—which
became known as structuralism—other early schools of
psychology were functionalism, which led to the development of behaviorism, and Gestalt psychology. The
American Psychological Association was founded in
1892 with the goals of encouraging research, enhancing
professional competence, and disseminating knowledge
about the field.
With the ascendance of the Viennese psychologist
Sigmund Freud and his method of psychoanalysis early
in the twentieth century, emphasis shifted from conscious
experience to unconscious processes investigated by
means of free association and other techniques. According to Freud, behavior and mental processes were the result of mostly unconscious struggles within each person
between the drive to satisfy basic instincts, such as sex or
aggression, and the limits imposed by society. At the
same time that Freud’s views were gaining popularity in
Europe, an American psychology professor, John B. Watson, was pioneering the behavioral approach, which focuses on observing and measuring external behaviors
rather than the internal workings of the mind. B.F. Skinner, who spent decades studying the effects of reward and
punishment on behavior, helped maintain the predominance of behaviorism in the United States through the
1950s and 1960s. Since the 1970s, many psychologists
have been influenced by the cognitive approach, which is

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

519

Psychophysics

concerned with the relationship of mental processes to
behavior. Cognitive psychology focuses on how people
take in, perceive, and store information, and how they
process and act on that information.
Additional psychological perspectives include the
neurobiological approach, focusing on relating behavior
to internal processes within the brain and nervous system, and the phenomenological approach, which is most
concerned with the individual’s subjective experience of
the world rather than the application of psychological
theory to behavior. While all these approaches differ in
their explanations of individual behavior, each contributes an important perspective to the psychological
image of the total human being. Most psychologists
apply the principles of various approaches in studying
and understanding human nature.
Along with several approaches to psychology there
are also numerous subfields in which these approaches
may be applied. Most subfields can be categorized under
one of two major areas of psychology referred to as basic
and applied psychology. Individual psychologists may
specialize in one of the subfields in either of these areas.
The subfields are often overlapping areas of interest rather
than isolated domains. Basic psychology encompasses the
subfields concerned with the advancement of psychological theory and research. Experimental psychology employs laboratory experiments to study basic behavioral
processes shared by different species, including sensation,
perception, learning, memory, communication, and motivation. Physiological psychology is concerned with the
ways in which biology shapes behavior and mental
processes, and developmental psychology is concerned
with behavioral development over the entire life span.
Other subfields include social psychology, quantitative
psychology, and the psychology of personality.
Applied psychology is the area of psychology concerned with applying psychological research and theory
to problems posed by everyday life. It includes clinical
psychology, the largest single field in psychology. Clinical psychologists—accounting for 40 percent of all psychologists—are involved in psychotherapy and psychological testing. Like clinical psychologists, counseling
psychologists apply psychological principles to diagnose
and treat individual emotional and behavioral problems.
Other subfields of applied psychology include school
psychology, which involves the evaluation and placement of students; educational psychology, which investigates the psychological aspects of the learning process;
and industrial psychology and organizational psychology,whichstudy the relationship between people and their
jobs. Community psychologists investigate environmental factors that contribute to mental and emotional disorders; health psychologistsdeal with the psychological as520

pects of physical illness, investigating the connections
between the mind and a person’s physical condition; and
consumer psychologistsstudy the preferences and buying
habits of consumers as well as their reactions to certain
advertising.
In response to society’s changing needs, new fields
of psychology are constantly emerging. One new type of
specialization, called environmental psychology, focuses
on the relationship between people and their physical
surroundings. Its areas of inquiry include such issues as
the effects of overcrowding and noise on urban dwellers
and the effects of building design. Another relatively
new specialty is forensic psychology,involving the application of psychology to law enforcement and the judicial
system. Forensic psychologists may help create personality profiles of criminals, formulate principles for jury
selection, or study the problems involved in eyewitness
testimony. Yet another emerging area is program evaluation, whose practitioners evaluate the effectiveness and
cost efficiency of government programs.
Depending on the nature of their work, psychologists may practice in a variety of settings, including colleges and universities, hospitals and community mental
health centers, schools, and businesses. A growing number of psychologists work in private practice and may
also specialize in multiple subfields. Most psychologists
earn a Ph.D. degree in the field, which requires completion of a four- to six-year program offered by a university psychology department. The course of study includes
a broad overview of the field, as well as specialization in
a particular subfield, and completion of a dissertation
and an internship. Students who intend to practice only
applied psychology rather than conduct research have
the option of obtaining a Psy.D. degree, which does not
entail writing a dissertation.
See also Behavior therapy; Cognitive therapy;
Counseling psychology; Developmental psychology; Experimental psychology; Health psychology; Research
Methodology

Psychophysics
The subfield of psychology that deals with the
transformation from the physical to the psychological through detection, identification, discrimination, and scaling.

Psychophysics originated with the research of Gustav Fechner (1801-1887), who first studied the relationship between incoming physical stimuli and the responses to them. Psychophysicists have generally used two ap-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

A different psychophysical approach combines the
concept of sensory abilities with the decisions and strategies that an observer uses to maximize performance in a
difficult task. Rather than try to identify a single point
for the threshold, psychophysicists who employ the signal detection theory have developed ways to measure
an observer’s sensitivity to stimuli in ways that go beyond the simple concept of the threshold. Some psychophysical research involves the identification of stimuli. There may be no question as to whether we can detect a stimulus, but sometimes we cannot identify it. For
example, people can often detect odors but cannot identify them. Research in this area has centered on determining how much information is needed to allow a person to
identify a stimulus. Identification constitutes a relatively
small part of psychophysical research, although such research has important practical applications. For example,
in the development of useful telephones, researchers had
to assess how much “noise” or unwanted sound could
accompany speech in a phone conversation so that a listener could understand what was said—that is, identify
the spoken words accurately.
A third area of psychophysics involves discrimination of different stimuli, or difference thresholds. No two
physical stimuli are absolutely identical, although they
may seem to be. The question of interest here is how
large must the difference be between two stimuli in order
for us to detect it. The amount by which two stimuli
must differ in order for us to detect the difference is referred to as the JND, or just noticeable difference. Research has indicated that for stimuli of low intensity, we
can detect a difference that is small, as the intensity increases, we need a larger difference. Sometimes psychophysicists use reaction time as a measure of how
different two stimuli are from one another. When two
stimuli are very similar, it takes a longer time to decide if
they are different, whereas large differences lead to fast
reaction times.

CONCEPTS IN PSYCHOPHYSICS
Absolute threshold: as the stimulus strengthens
from the undetectable, the point at which the person
first detects it.
Signal detection theory: theory pertaining to the
interaction of the sensory capabilities and the decisionmaking factors in detecting a stimulus.
Difference thresholds: at which point can one differentiate between two stimuli. This point is termed justnoticeable difference.
Scaling: using rating scales to assign relative values
(for example, rating on a scale of one to ten) to sensory
experiences.

The final area of interest to psychophysicists is
scaling, the activity of deciding how large or small
something is or how much of it is present. Any sensory
experience can be scaled. For instance, if the attractiveness of a painting is rated on a scale of one to ten, it is
being scaled. If the painting is rated nine, it is considered more attractive than a painting rated eight. This
simple example gives the concept underlying scaling,
but psychologists have developed more complicated
techniques and sophisticated mathematical approaches
to scaling.

Psychosexual stages
Psychoanalytical theory of development based on
sexual impulses.

Austrian psychotherapist Sigmund Freud described
personality development during childhood in terms of
stages based on shifts in the primary location of sexual
impulses. During each stage libidinal pleasure is derived
from a particular area of the body—called an erogenous
zone—and the activities centered in that area. If the
problems and conflicts of a particular stage are not adequately resolved, the child—and, later, the adult—may
remain fixated at that stage. A fixation consists of a conscious or unconscious preoccupation with an area of the
body (such as the mouth in a compulsive eater), as well
as certain personality traits. Freud believed that some
degree of fixation is present in everyone and that it is an
important determinant of personality.
During the three pregenital stages that occur in a
child’s first five years, sexuality is narcissistic: it is di-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

521

Psychosexual stages

proaches in studying our sensitivity to stimuli around us:
measuring the absolute threshold or discovering the difference threshold. In studying the absolute threshold
using the method of constant stimuli, an experimenter
will, for example, produce an extremely faint tone which
the listener cannot hear, then gradually increase the intensity until the person can just hear it; on the next trial,
the experimenter will play a sound that is clearly heard,
then reduce its intensity until the listener can no longer
hear it. Thresholds can also be ascertained through the
method of constant stimuli. In this approach, stimuli of
varying intensity are randomly presented. Although an
observer’s measured threshold will change depending on
methodology, this technique gives an estimate of an individual’s sensitivity.

Psychosexual stages

of elimination becomes physically possible and is inculcated through toilet training. This is a child’s first major
experience with discipline and outside authority and requires the subordination of natural instincts to social demands. Experiences at this stage play a role in determining a person’s degree of initiative and attitude toward
authority. A child who is harshly disciplined in the
course of toilet training may later rebel against authority
or become overly fastidious, controlled, or stingy. Conversely, a child who is rewarded and praised for attempts to control elimination is more likely to develop a
willingness to “let go” that is associated with generosity
and creativity.

Babies derive pleasure from sucking and mouthing various
objects, including their own toes, like this infant. This
illustrates the oral stage. (Lousasa/Petit. Photo Researchers,
Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

rected toward the child’s own body as a source of pleasure rather than outward. In the oral stage, which occupies approximately the first year of life, pleasurable impulses are concentrated in the area of the mouth and
lips, the infant’s source of nourishment. The child derives pleasure from sucking, mouthing, swallowing,
and, later, biting and chewing food. The mouth is also
used for exploring. The primary emotional issues at this
stage of life are nurturance and dependency. A person
who develops an oral fixation—for example, by being
weaned too early or too late—is likely to focus on forms
of oral gratification such as smoking, drinking, or compulsive eating. Personality traits may include excessive
dependency and desire for the approval of others or a
drive to acquire possessions that recalls the infant’s
drive to incorporate food.
The next stage—the anal stage—takes place during
the infant’s second year. At this point, voluntary control
522

Between the ages of two and three years, the focus
of a child’s attention and pleasure shifts from the anal
to the genital area, initiating what Freud termed the
phallic stage. During this period, important changes
take place in the child’s attitude toward his or her parents. Sexual longings are experienced toward the parent
of the opposite sex, accompanied by feelings of rivalry
and hostility for the same-sex parent. Freud called this
situation the Oedipus complex for its similarity to the
plot of the Greek tragedy Oedipus Rex, in which the
central character unknowingly kills his father and marries his mother. While the broad outlines of the Oedipal
stage are similar for both sexes, it takes a somewhat
different course in male and female children. A boy
fears that his father will punish him for his feelings toward his mother by removing the locus of these feelings, the penis. This fear, which Freud called castration
anxiety, causes the boy to abandon his incestuous attachment to his mother and begin to identify with his
father, imitating him and adopting his values, a process
that results in the formation of the boy’s superego. To
describe the experience undergone by girls in the Oedipal stage, Freud used the term “Electra complex,”
which was derived from the name of a figure in Greek
mythology who was strongly attached to her father,
Agamemnon, and participated in avenging his death at
the hands of her mother, Clytemnestra. Paralleling the
castration anxiety felt by boys, girls, according to
Freud, experience penis envy. The girl blames her
mother for depriving her of a penis and desires her father because he possesses one. Ultimately, the girl, like
the boy, represses her incestuous desires and comes to
identify with the same-sex parent, the mother, through
the development of a superego.
As the phallic stage ends, its conflicts are resolved
or repressed, and it is followed by the latency period,
during which sexual impulses are dormant. The latency
period separates pregenital sexuality from the genital
stage, which begins with adolescence and lasts through
adulthood. In the genital stage, narcissism is replaced by

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Freud, Sigmund. New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis, Chapter Five. New York: W. W. Norton and Co., 1933.
Hall, Calvin S. A Primer of Freudian Psychology. New York:
Harper and Row, 1982.

Psychosis
A symptom of mental illness characterized by a
radical change in personality and a distorted or diminished sense of objective reality.

Characteristics
Psychosis may appear as a symptom of a number of
mental disorders, including mood and personality disorders, schizophrenia, delusional disorder, and substance
abuse. It is also the defining feature of the psychotic disorders (i.e., brief psychotic disorder, shared psychotic
disorder, psychotic disorder due to a general medical
condition, and substance-induced psychotic disorder).
Patients suffering from psychosis are unable to distinguish the real from the unreal. They experience hallucinations and/or delusions that they believe are real, and
they typically behave in an inappropriate and confused
manner.

Causes and symptoms
Psychosis may be caused by a number of biological
and social factors, depending on the disorder underlying
the symptom. Trauma and stress can induce a short-term
psychosis known as brief psychotic disorder. This psychotic episode, which lasts a month or less, can be
brought on by the stress of major life-changing events
(e.g., death of a close friend or family member, natural
disaster, traumatic event), and can occur in patients with
no prior history of mental illness.
Psychosis can also occur as a result of an organic
medical condition (known as psychotic disorder due to a
general medical condition). Neurological conditions
(e.g., epilepsy, migraines, Parkinson’s disease, cerebrovascular disease, dementia), metabolic imbalances
(hypoglycemia), endocrine disorders (hyper- and hypothyroidism), renal disease, electrolyte imbalance, and
autoimmune disorders may all trigger psychotic episodes.
Hallucinogenics, PCP, amphetamines, cocaine, marijuana, and alcohol may cause a psychotic reaction dur-

ing use, abuse, or withdrawal. Certain prescription medications such as anesthetics, anticonvulsants, chemotherapeutic agents, and antiparkinsonian medications may also
induce psychotic symptoms as a side-effect. In addition,
toxic substances like carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide, which may be deliberately or accidentally ingested,
have been reported to cause substance-induced psychotic
disorder.
Schizophrenia and its related disorders (schizophreniform disorder and schizoaffective disorder), mental illnesses with strong psychotic features, are thought
to be caused by abnormalities in the structure and chemistry of the brain and influenced by both social and genetic factors. Delusional disorder, another mental illness
defined by psychotic episodes, is also thought to have a
possible hereditary and neurological base. Abnormalities
in the limbic system, the portion of the brain on the inner
edge of the cerebral cortex that is believed to regulate
emotions, are suspected to cause the delusions that are a
feature of psychosis.
Psychosis is characterized by the following symptoms:
• Delusions. An unshakable and irrational belief in something untrue. Delusions defy normal reasoning, and remain firm even when overwhelming proof is presented
to disprove them.
• Hallucinations. Psychosis causes false or distorted sensory experience that appear to be real. Psychotic patients often see, hear, smell, taste, or feel things that
aren’t there.
• Disorganized speech. Psychotic patients often speak incoherently, using noises instead of words and “talking”
in unintelligible speech patterns.
• Disorganized or catatonic behavior. Behavior that is
completely inappropriate to the situation or environment. Catatonic patients have either a complete lack of
or inappropriate excess of motor activity. They can be
completely rigid and unable to move (vegetative), or in
constant motion. Disorganized behavior is unpredictable and inappropriate for a situation (e.g., screaming obscenities in the middle of class).

Diagnosis
Patients with psychotic symptoms should undergo a
thorough physical examination and detailed patient history to rule out organic causes of the psychosis (such as
brain tumor). If a psychiatric cause is suspected, a psychologist or psychiatrist will usually conduct an interview with the patient and administer clinical assessments. These assessments may include the Adolescent
Behavior Checklist (ABC), Anxiety Disorders Interview
Schedule for DSM-IV (ADIS-IV), Psychotic Behavior

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

523

Psychosis

focusing sexual energy on a partner of the opposite sex,
ultimately resulting in sexual union and extending to
feelings such as friendship, altruism, and love.

Psychosomatic disorders

Rating Scale (PBRS), and the Chapman Psychosis
Proneness Scales.

Treatment
Psychosis caused by schizophrenia or another mental illness should be treated by a psychiatrist and/or psychologist. Other medical and mental health professionals may be part of the treatment team, depending on the
severity of the psychosis and the needs of the patient.
Medication and/or psychosocial therapy is typically employed to treat the underlying disorder.
Antipsychotic medications commonly prescribed to
treat psychosis include risperidone (Risperdal), thioridazine (Mellaril), halperidol (Haldol), chlorpromazine
(Thorazine), clozapine (Clozaril), loxapine (Loxitane),
molindone hydrochloride (Moban), thiothixene (Navane), and olanzapine (Zyprexa). Possible common sideeffects of antipsychotics include dry mouth, drowsiness,
muscle stiffness, and hypotension. More serious side effects include tardive dyskinesia (involuntary movements
of the body) and neuroleptic malignant syndrome
(NMS), a potentially fatal condition characterized by
muscle rigidity, altered mental status, and irregular pulse
and blood pressure.
Once an acute psychotic episode has subsided, psychosocial therapy and living and vocational skills training may be recommended. Drug maintenance treatment
is usually prescribed to prevent further episodes.

Prognosis
The longer and more severe a psychotic episode, the
poorer the prognosis for the patient. However, early diagnosis and long-term follow-up care can improve the
outcome for patients with psychotic disorders. Schizophrenia has a 60% treatment success rate.
See also Neurosis
Paula Ford-Martin
Further Reading
American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders 4th ed. Washington, D.C.:
American Psychiatric Press, Inc., 1994.

Further Information
National Alliance for the Mentally Ill (NAMI). 200 North
Glebe Road, Suite 1015, Arlington, VA, USA. 222033754, (800)950-6264. http://www.nami.org.
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). 6001 Executive
Boulevard, Rm. 8184, MSC 9663, Bethesda, MD, USA.
20892-9663, fax: (301)443-4279, (301)443-4513. Email:
nimhinfo@nih.gov. http://www.nimh.nih.gov.
524

Psychosomatic disorders
Physical illnesses that are believed to be psychologically based; also referred to as psychophysiological disorders.

The American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSMIV) classifies psychosomatic illnesses under “Psychological Factors Affecting Physical Conditions.” Physicians have been aware that people’s mental and emotional states influence their physical well-being since
the time of Hippocrates. In the twentieth century, the
discoveries of psychologists have shed new light on
how the mind and body interact to produce health or
illness. Sigmund Freud introduced the idea that unconscious thoughts can be converted into physical
symptoms (conversion reaction). The formal study of
psychosomatic illnesses began in Europe in the 1920s,
and by 1939, the journal Psychosomatic Medicine had
been founded in the United States. Eventually, sophisticated laboratory experiments replaced clinical observation as the primary method of studying psychosomatic illness. Researchers in the field of psychophysiology measured such responses as blood pressure,
heart rate, and skin temperature to determine the physiological effects of human behavior. Animal research
have also contributed to the growing body of knowledge about psychosomatic disorders. Three theories
have been particularly popular in explaining why certain persons develop psychosomatic disorders and
what determines the forms these illnesses take. One
theory contends that psychological stress affects bodily organs that are constitutionally weak or weakened
by stress. Another links specific types of illness with
particular types of stress. Still another theory suggests
that physiological predispositions combined with psychological stress to produce psychosomatic illness.
The parts of the body most commonly affected
by psychosomatic disorders are the gastrointestinal
and respiratory systems. Gastrointestinal disorders
include gastric and duodenal ulcers, ulcerative colitis,
and irritable bowel syndrome. (Anorexia nervosa and
bulimia are sometimes considered psychosomatic
disorders, but they also appear under the category of
“anxiety disorder—eating disorders” in DSM-IV. )
Respiratory problems caused or worsened by psychological factors include asthma and hyperventilation
syndrome. Cardiovascular complaints include coronary artery disease, hypertension, tachycardia (speeded-up and irregular heart rhythm), and migraine
headaches. Psychosomatic disorders also affect the
skin (eczema, allergies, and neurodermatitis) and

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Probably the most well-known psychosomatic connection is that of stress and coronary heart disease. The
term “Type A” has been used for over twenty years to
describe the aggressive, competitive, impatient, controlling type of person whom researchers have found to be
more prone to heart disease than people who are more
easygoing and mild-mannered and less hostile and concerned with time. In 1981, a panel appointed by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute found that Type
A behavior poses a greater risk of coronary heart disease and myocardial infarction (heart attack) than do
cigarette smoking, age, hypertension, or a high serum
cholesterol count.
Emotional stress can also affect the immune system, raising the risk to the body from such foreign invaders as bacteria, viruses, and cancer cells. People
under stress are more likely to develop infectious diseases, including those stemming from the reactivation of
latent herpes viruses. It is known that several of the
body’s reactions to stress, including the release of cortisol, adrenaline, and other hormones, suppress the activity of the immune system. A special field, psychoneuroimmunology, studies how the interaction of psychological and physiological reactions affects the functioning of the immune system.
People suffering from psychosomatic disorders have
been helped by treatment of either their physical symptoms, the underlying psychological causes, or both. If
the disorder is in an advanced stage (such as in severe
asthma attacks, perforated ulcers, or debilitating colitis)
symptomatic treatment must be undertaken initially as
an emergency measure before the emotional component
can be addressed. Psychological approaches range from
classic psychoanalysis, which addresses a person’s early
traumas and conflicts, to behavior therapy that focuses
on changing learned behaviors that create or increase
anxiety. Medications such as tranquilizers or antidepressants may be effective in relieving symptoms of
psychosomatic disorders. Hypnosis has successfully
been used to treat hyperventilation, ulcers, migraine
headaches, and other complaints. Today, psychologists
commonly treat psychosomatic ailments with the aid of
such relaxation techniques as progressive relaxation, autogenic training, transcendental meditation, and yoga.
Biofeedback has been used in treating a number of different clinical problems, including tachycardia, hypertension, and both tension and migraine headaches.

Psychosurgery
Highly controversial medical procedures where
areas of the brain are destroyed or disabled
through surgery as treatment for mental illness.

Psychosurgery involves severing or otherwise disabling areas of the brain to treat a personality disorder,
behavior disorder or other mental illness. The most
common form of psychosurgery is the lobotomy, where
the nerves connecting the frontal lobes of the brain and
the thalamus or hypothalamus are severed. Performed
first in the late 1930s, by the 1940s lobotomies were recommended for patients diagnosed with schizophrenia,
severe obsessive-compulsive disorder, severe depression, and uncontrollable aggressive behavior. Other psychosurgeries also involve severing nerve connections to
the hypothalamus, since it plays a key role in controlling
emotions. Psychosurgery has been recommended less
frequently as more effective drugs for treatment of psychological disorders have been developed.
Further Reading
Rodgers, Joann Ellison. Psychosurgery: Damaging the Brain
to Save the Mind. New York: HarperCollins Publishers,
1992.
Valenstein, Elliott S. The Psychosurgery Debate: Scientific,
Legal, and Ethical Perspectives. San Francisco: W. H.
Freeman, 1980.

Psychotherapy
The treatment of mental or emotional disorders and
adjustment problems through the use of psychological techniques rather than through physical or biological means.

Psychoanalysis, the first modern form of psychotherapy, was called the “talking cure,” and the many
varieties of therapy practiced today are still characterized
by their common dependence on a verbal exchange between the counselor or therapist and the person seeking
help. The therapeutic interaction is characterized by mutual trust, with the goal of helping individuals change destructive or unhealthy behaviors, thoughts, and emotions.
It is common for experienced therapists to combine several different approaches or techniques. The most common approaches are discussed below.

Psychodynamic approach

Further Reading
Mind, Body, Medicine: How to Use Your Mind for Better
Health. Consumer Reports Books, 1993.

Freudian psychoanalysis places emphasis on uncovering unconscious motivations and breaking down de-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

525

Psychotherapy

genitourinary system (menstrual disorders and sexual
dysfunction).

Psychotic disorders

fenses. Therapy sessions may be scheduled once or even
twice a week for a year or more. This type of therapy is
appropriate when internal conflicts contribute significantly to a personís problems. (For more information,
see entry on Psychoanalysis).

Behavioral techniques
In contrast to the psychodynamic approach, behavior-oriented therapy is geared toward helping people see
their problems as learned behaviors that can be modified,
without looking for unconscious motivations or hidden
meanings. According to the theory behind this approach,
once behavior is changed, feelings will change as well.
Probably the best-known type of behavioral therapy is
behavior modification, which focuses on eliminating
undesirable habits by providing positive reinforcement
for the more desirable behaviors.
Another behavioral technique is systematic desensitization, in which people are deliberately and gradually
exposed to a feared object or experience to help them
overcome their fears. A person who is afraid of dogs
may first be given a stuffed toy dog, then be exposed to a
real dog seen at a distance, and eventually forced to interact with a dog at close range. Relaxation training is
another popular form of behavior therapy. Through
such techniques as deep breathing, visualization, and
progressive muscle relaxation, clients learn to control
fear and anxiety.

Family and group therapy
Family therapy has proven effective in treating a
number of emotional and adjustment problems. While
the clientís immediate complaint is the initial focus of
attention, the ultimate goal of family therapy is to improve the interaction between all family members and
enhance communication and coping skills on a longterm basis (although therapy itself need not cover an extended time period). Group therapy, which is often
combined with individual therapy, offers the support and
companionship of other people experiencing the same
problems and issues.
Therapy is terminated when the treatment goals
have been met or if the client and/or therapist conclude
that it isn’t working. It can be effective to phase out
treatment by gradually reducing the frequency of therapy sessions. Even after regular therapy has ended, the
client may return for periodic follow-up and reassessment sessions.
Further Reading
Engler, Jack and Daniel Goleman. The Consumer’s Guide to
Psychotherapy. New York: Fireside, 1992.
Kanfer, Frederick H. and Arnold P. Goldstein, eds. Helping
People Change: A Textbook of Methods. New York: Pergamon Press, 1991.

Psychotic disorders
Cognitive methods
Some behavior-oriented therapy methods are used to
alter not only overt behavior, but also the thought patterns that drive it. This type of treatment is known as
cognitive-behavior therapy (or just cognitive therapy).
Its goal is to help people break out of distorted, harmful
patterns of thinking and replace them with healthier
ones. Common examples of negative thought patterns include magnifying or minimizing the extent of a problem;
“all or nothing” thinking (i.e., a person regards himself
as either perfect or worthless); overgeneralization (arriving at broad conclusions based on one incident, for example); and personalization (continually seeing oneself
as the cause or focus of events).
In cognitive-behavioral therapy, a therapist may talk
to the client, pointing out illogical thought patterns, or use
a variety of techniques, such as thought substitution, in
which a frightening or otherwise negative thought is driven out by substituting a pleasant thought in its place.
Clients may also be taught to use positive self-talk, a repetition of positive affirmations. Cognitive therapy is usually
provided on a short-term basis (generally 10-20 sessions).
526

A diagnostic term formerly used in a general way
to designate the most severe psychological disorders; now used in a much narrower sense in connection with specific symptoms and conditions.

Formerly, all psychological disorders were considered either psychotic or neurotic. Psychotic disorders
were those that rendered patients unable to function normally in their daily lives and left them “out of touch
with reality.” They were associated with impaired memory, language, and speech and an inability to think rationally. Neurotic disorders, by comparison, were characterized chiefly by anxiety; any impairment of functioning was primarily social. Psychotic conditions were
attributed to physiological causes, neurotic conditions to
psychosocial ones. Other distinguishing features associated primarily with psychotic disorders were hospitalization and treatment by biological methods—medication and electroconvulsive therapy. With the development of new types of psychoactive drugs in the 1950s
and 1960s, medication became a common form of therapy for anxiety, depression, and other problems categorized as neurotic.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Hales, Dianne, and Robert E. Hales, M.D. Caring for the
Mind: The Comprehensive Guide to Mental Health. New
York: Bantam Books, 1995.

Puberty
The process of physical growth and sexual maturation that signals the end of childhood and the advent of adolescence. (Also, the period during
which this process takes place.)

The word puberty is derived from the Latin pubertas, which means adulthood. Puberty is initiated by hormonal changes triggered by a part of the brain called the
hypothalamus, which stimulates the pituitary gland,
which in turn activates other glands as well. These
changes begin about a year before any of their results are
visible. Both the male reproductive hormone testosterone
and female hormone estrogen are present in children of
both sexes. However, their balance changes at puberty,
with girls producing relatively more estrogen and boys
producing more testosterone.
Most experts suggest that parents begin short and
casual discussions about puberty with their children by
the age of seven or eight. Offering the child reading materials about puberty can impart information to the
young person without the awkwardness that may characterize the parent-child conversations. Parents can then
offer their children opportunities to ask questions or to
discuss any aspects of puberty and sexuality that may
arise from their reading.
The first obvious sign of puberty is a growth spurt
that typically occurs in girls between the ages of 10 and

14 and in boys between 12 and 16. Between these ages
both sexes grow about nine inches. The average girl
gains about 38 pounds, and the average boy gains about
42. One reason for the awkwardness of adolescence is
the fact that this growth spurt proceeds at different rates
in different parts of the body. Hands and feet grow faster
than arms and legs, which, in turn, lengthen before the
torso does, all of which create the impression of gawkiness common to many teenagers. In addition, there can
be temporary unevenness of growth on the two sides of
the body, and even facial development is disproportionate, as the nose, lips, and ears grow before the head attains its full adult size. The growth spurt at puberty is not
solely an external one. Various internal organs increase
significantly in size, in some cases with observable consequences. Increases in heart and lung size and in the
total volume of blood give adolescents increased
strength and endurance for athletics and for recreational
activities such as dancing. (During puberty, the heart
doubles in size.) Teenagers’ ravenous appetites are related to the increased capacity of the digestive system, and
the decrease in respiratory problems (including asthma )
is associated with the fact that the lymphoid system,
which includes the tonsils and adenoids, actually shrinks
in adolescence. Yet another change, the increase in secretions from the sebaceous glands, triggered by the growth
hormone androgen, is responsible for acne, which affects
about 75% of teenagers. The excess oil from these
glands clogs pores, and they become inflamed, causing
the reddening and swelling of acne.
Following the beginning of the growth spurt, the
sexual organs begin to mature and secondary sex characteristics appear. In girls, the uterus and vagina become larger, and the lining of the vagina thickens. The
first visible sign of sexual maturation is often the appearance of a small amount of colorless pubic hair
shortly after the growth spurt begins. Over the next
three years, the pubic hair becomes thicker, darker,
coarser, and curlier and spreads to cover a larger area.
Hair also develops under the arms, on the arms and legs
(sufficiently so that most girls start shaving), and, to a
slight degree, on the face. Around the age of 10 or 11,
“breast buds,” the first sign of breast development, appear. Full breast development takes about three or four
years and is generally not complete until puberty is almost over. The single most dramatic sign of sexual
maturation in girls is menarche, the onset of menstruation, which usually occurs after a girl’s growth rate has
peaked. In virtually all cases it occurs between the ages
of 10 and 16, with the average age in the United States
being 12.8 years. The first menstrual periods are usually anovulatory, meaning that they happen without ovulation. Periods remain irregular for a while, and for at

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

527

Puberty

”Psychotic” and “neurotic” are no longer employed
as major categories in the American Psychiatric Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) . Instead, disorders that formerly belonged to either one category or the other appear side by
side in Axis I of the manual under the heading “Clinical
Syndromes.” The term “psychotic” still appears in DSMIV, most prominently in the categorization “Schizophrenia and Other Psychotic Disorders.” The disorders in this
section have as their defining feature symptoms considered psychotic, which in this context can refer to delusions, hallucinations, and other positive symptoms of
schizophrenia, such as confused speech and catatonia.
In other parts of DSM-IV, “psychotic” is also used to describe aspects of a disorder even when they are not its
defining feature, as in “Major Depressive Disorder with
Psychotic Features.”

Puberity

more dramatic (and less controlled) in boys, whose voices occasionally break, producing an embarrassing highpitched squeak.

HORMONE SURGE
TRIGGERS PUBERTY

least a year after menarche young women’s fertility levels are very low, and they are prone to spontaneous
abortions if they do conceive.

The sequence and age range of the developmental
changes associated with puberty can vary widely. Although most children begin puberty between the ages
of 10 and 12, it can start at any age from 8 to 16. The
most obvious determining factor is gender; on average,
puberty arrives earlier for girls than boys. Heredity
also appears to play an important role. Compared to an
overall age range of nine to 18 for menarche, the age
difference for sisters averages only 13 months and for
identical twins, less than three months. Body weight is
a factor as well: puberty often begins earlier in heavier
children of both sexes and later in thinner ones. The
onset of menstruation, in particular, appears to be related to amounts of body fat. Girls with little body fat, especially athletes, often start menstruating at a laterthan-average age. Over the past 100 years, puberty has
tended to begin increasingly early in both sexes (a phenomenon called the secular trend ). In 1997, the results
of a study led by Dr. Marcia E. Herman-Giddens of
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of
Public Health provided evidence that the average age of
menarche was declining. Instead of occurring between
the ages of 12 and 14, as is typical in the late 1990s,
girls’ first menstrual periods commonly appeared between the ages of 15 and 17 in the 19th century. Puberty in boys usually didn’t begin until the ages of 15 or
16 (in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, boy sopranos in their mid-to-late teens still sang in church
choirs). Explanations for this pattern have ranged from
evolution to better health, especially as a consequence
of improved nutrition.

In boys, as in girls, the first outward sign of sexual
maturation is often light-colored pubic hair around the
time the growth spurt begins. The testes and scrotum
begin to grow, and the scrotum darkens, thickens, and
becomes pendulous. About a year after the testes begin
to increase in size, the penis lengthens and widens, taking several years to reach its full size. Sperm production
increases, and ejaculations—the male counterpart to
menarche in girls—begin, occurring through nocturnal
emission, masturbation, or sexual intercourse. (It takes
from one to three years until ejaculations contain enough
sperm for a boy to be really fertile.) Boys’ pubic hair,
like that of girls, gradually becomes thicker and curlier
and covers a wider area, and facial hair appears, first in
the mustache area above the upper lip and later at the
sides of the face and on the chin. As a boy’s larynx
grows and the vocal cords lengthen, his voice drops
(roughly an octave in pitch) and changes in quality. Although girls’ voices also become lower, the change is

An important aspect of puberty is the development
of body image. Teenagers are often critical of their
bodies during this period, either because they feel they
are maturing too early or too late, or because they fail
to match the stereotyped ideals of attractiveness for
their sex (i.e., tall and muscular for men, fashionably
thin for women). Girls who mature early have a hard
time initially because they feel self-conscious and isolated, but they adjust well and even gain in status once
their peers begin to catch up. Some research even suggests that girls who mature early may ultimately be
better off than those who mature late because the turmoil of their early teenage years helps them develop
coping skills that stand them in good stead later on.
For boys, the relative positions of early and late maturers is reversed. Those who are already tall and athletic
in junior high school feel better about themselves than
those who remain short and skinny. Researchers have
linked late physical maturation in boys to the develop-

A point in child development known as adrenarche—the beginning of adrenal androgen activity—may
represent the beginning of the process of puberty. Two
University of Chicago researchers, Dr. Martha K. McClintock and Dr. Gilbert Herdt, believe that puberty is
triggered by dihydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), a hormone produced by the adrenal glands. According to
data the two gathered from three separate studies,
DHEA levels begin to increase at around the age of six
and reach a critical level around age ten. The researchers characterize these hormonal changes as triggering a number of cognitive, emotional, and social
changes in around fourth or fifth grade. Students in
these grades begin to engage in boy-girl teasing, exhibit
a significant increase in abstract reasoning skills, and
experience vulnerability to embarrassment. The three
studies also gathered data on subjects’ (who were mostly in their mid 30s) first recollected feelings of sexual attraction. The mean age reported by the subjects was
around 10 or 11 . This finding has led the researchers to
postulate that sexual development moves along a continuum, beginning with attraction, progressing to desire,
and leading to the willingness and readiness to act on
the desire. McClintock, quoted in the New York Times,
noted: “Our culture regards middle childhood as a time
of hormonal quiescence. Freud called it ‘latency.’ But
actually a great deal of activity is going on.”

528

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Sexually active
by age

All
(Number)

All
(Percent)

Boys
(Number)

Boys
(Percent)

Girls
(Number)

Girls
(Percent)

13

749

8.6%

389

14.7%

350

2.7%

14

509

17.7%

263

24.6%

246

10.8%

15

320

31.2%

166

35.0%

154

27.3%

16

169

54.9%

82

63.1%

87

47.1%

17

78

68.6%

38

72.1%

40

65.8%

*This table reports data on the number and percent of adolescents who have become sexually active by a certain age. Data
were gathered by the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth, 1988-92.

ment of both positive personalitytraits (humor, perceptiveness, flexibility, creativity, and leadership
skills) and negative ones (restlessness and lack of
poise). In most cases, adolescents gradually become
more accepting of their bodies in the years following
junior high school.
Further Reading
Bell, Alison, and Lisa Rooney. Your Body Yourself: A Guide to
Your Changing Body. Chicago: Contemporary Books,
1993.
Bourgeois, Paulette, and Martin Wolfish. Changes in You and
Me: A Book About Puberty, Mostly for Boys. Kansas City:
Andrews and McMeel, 1994.
Children’s Television Workshop. What Kids Want to Know
About Sex and Growing Up. Los Angeles, CA: Pacific
Arts Video Publishing, 1992. (One 60-minute videocassette and one 20-page parent’s guide.)
Chirinian, Alain. Boys’ Puberty: An Illustrated Manual for
Parents and Sons. New York: Tom Doherty Associates,
1989.
Feldman, Shirley, and Glen R. Elliott, eds. At the Threshold:
The Developing Adolescent. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1990.
Gilbert, Susan. “Early Puberty Onset Seems Prevalent.” New
York Times 146, April 9, 1997, p. B12.
Jukes, Mavis. It’s a Girl Thing: How to Stay Healthy, Safe, and
In Charge. New York: A. Knopf, 1996.
Marano, Hara Estroff. “Puberty May Start at 6 as Hormones
Surge.” New York Times 146, July 1, 1997, p. B9+.
Nathanson, Laura. “Prepuberty Coaching.” Parents Magazine
72 (March 1997): pp. 110+.
———. Changes in You and Me: A Book About Puberty, Mostly for Girls. Kansas City: Andrews and McMeel, 1994.
Steinberg, Laurence, and Ann Levine. You and Your Adolescent: A Parent’s Guide for Ages 10-20. New York: Harper
& Row, 1990.
What’s Happening to Me? A Guide to Puberty. Los Angeles,
CA: LCA, 1986. (Video recording)

Ethel Dench Puffer
1872-1950
American educator and psychologist.

Ethel Dench Puffer was born in Framingham, Massachusetts, the eldest of four daughters. Her family was of
native New England stock and highly educated by the
standard of the era. After graduating from Smith College
in 1891 at the age of 19 and teaching high school for one
year in New Hampshire, Puffer returned to Smith as an
instructor of mathematics, where she taught for the next
three years while developing a keen interest in psychology. In 1895, Puffer traveled to Germany to study aesthetics under Hugo Münsterberg (1863-1916), then a professor of psychology at the University of Freiberg. On the
strength of her research, she was awarded a fellowship
for graduate study by the Association of Collegiate
Alumnae. Enrolling in Radcliffe College in 1897 and
working again under Münsterberg at Harvard University,
she earned a certificate stating she had completed work
equivalent to that of a doctoral candidate for the Harvard
Ph.D. Because of the restrictions against granting the
Harvard degree to women, however, Puffer was forced to
make a special appeal to Radcliffe to grant her the doctoral degree. In 1902, she was one of the first four
women to be offered the Radcliffe Ph.D.
Restricted from many research opportunities because
of her gender, Puffer returned to teaching psychology at
Radcliffe, Wellesley, and Simmons Colleges, and published a book, The Psychology of Beauty, in 1905, based on
her research in aesthetics. In 1908, her marriage to Benjamin Howes further impacted her career due to cultural
norms of the period which did not permit married women
to work outside of the home. She continued to write scholarly articles through her forties while raising two children.
Puffer’s published reflections of the role of women and the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

529

Ethel Dench Puffer

ADOLESCENTS WHO HAVE BECOME SEXUALLY ACTIVE*

Punishment

conflict between marriage and career in the Atlantic
Monthly in 1922 brought attention to one of the basic
dilemmas confronting educated women of that time.
Further Reading
Scarborough, Elizabeth and Laurel Furumoto. Untold Lives:
The First Generation of American Women Psychologists .
New York: Columbia University Press, 1987, pp. 70-90.

Punishment
Penalty imposed on another as a result of unwanted behavior.

Punishment is defined as the administration of aversive stimulus to reduce or eliminate unwanted behavior.
It can be either physical or nonphysical. Punishment differs from negative reinforcement in that the latter increases the frequency of behavior by removing a negative event. Punishment can be as simple as giving electric shocks to lab rats to prevent them from touching a
lever or as complex—and controversial—as placing
criminals in jail for breaking the law. The use and effectiveness of corporal punishment have also been debated
by psychologists, parents, teachers, and religious leaders
for many years.
Research studies have found that punishment is effective in suppressing or eliminating unwanted behavior.
But in order for punishment to be effective it must happen immediately after the behavior, be severe, and occur
every time the behavior occurs. Detractors of the use of
punishment have pointed out that, outside the laboratory
setting, it is almost impossible to consistently administer
punishment in this manner.
Even when punishment is administered “properly,”
psychologists have questioned the value of punishment in
truly changing behavior, arguing that the desired outcome
is only temporary. As evidenced by increasing crime rates
in most major cities, punishment (fines, imprisonment,

PUNISHMENT
Positive punishment

Negative punishment

When the subject—a
person or animal—
engages in a behavior
and something negative
is applied as a result,
the behavior is less
likely to be repeated.

When the subject—a
person or animal—
engages in a behavior
and something positive is
taken away, that behavior
is less likely to be
repeated.

530

social stigma, etc.) does not appear to deter unwanted behavior. In addition, psychologists have identified other
“downsides” to using punishment. For instance, people
use punishment inappropriately, decreasing its effectiveness. People punish when they are upset or angry. The recipient experiences anxiety, fear, rage, or hatred. The use
of punishment can lead to more resistance and aggression on the part of the one being punished. The punishment can also backfire—instead of serving to punish a
child, for example, spanking brings the wanted attention
of a parent. In addition, corporal punishment defeats its
own purpose by modeling aggressive or physical behavior, the very behavior it is often attempting to correct.
Most current promoters of punitive discipline in the
United States espouse nonphysical forms of control,
such as the use of reinforcements, logical consequences,
or penalties. With children, behavior modification techniques such as time-out have proven very effective in
modifying disruptive behaviors such as hitting, grabbing,
talking back, or tantrums.
Further Reading
McCord, Joan, ed. Coercion and Punishment in Long-Term
Perspectives. Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
Straus, Murray, Richard Gelles, and Suzanne Steinmetz. Behind Closed Doors: Violence in the American Family.
New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday, 1980.

Pyromania
Irresistible urge to start fires.

Little is known about pyromania. The term comes
from the Greek words pyr (fire) and mania (madness). It
is a rare condition, listed under the heading of impulse
control disorders. Pyromania is not the same as arson
(deliberate fire-setting), and not all arsonists (fire-setters)
are pyromaniacs. Fires are often started by individuals
with this disorder deliberately and with careful planning,
rather than by accident. A key feature of this disorder is
the presence of repeated association with fire, but with
no evidence of a reason or motivation for the fire (such
as profit or to hide criminal activity). Nearly all pyromaniacs are male. Pyromania may begin in childhood, but
there is no conclusive data regarding the typical age of
onset. Similarly, there is no documented link between
fire-setting in childhood and adult pyromania.
See also Impulse control disorders
Further Reading
Morrison, James. DSM-IV Made Easy: The Clinician’s Guide
to Diagnosis. New York: Guilford Press, 1995.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Q
Qualitative methods
Research methods that emphasize detailed, personal descriptions of phenomena.

Research psychologists can collect two kinds of information: quantitative data and qualitative data. Quantitative data are often represented numerically in the
form of means, percentages, or frequency counts. Such
data are often referred to as “measurement” data, referring to the fact that we often like to measure the
amount or extent of some behavior, trait, or disposition.
For example, shyness, test anxiety, and depression
can all be appraised by means of paper-and-pencil tests
which yield numerical scores representing the extent of
shyness, anxiety, etc. that resides in the individual taking the test. A psychologist interested in the relationship between test anxiety and grade point average
would collect the appropriate quantitative information
on each of these two variables and conduct statistical
tests that would reveal the strength (or absence) of the
relationship.
The term “qualitative research methods” refers to a
variety of ways of collecting information that is less
amenable to quantification and statistical manipulation.
Qualitative methods differ from quantitative methods
largely because their ultimate purpose is different. The
goal of qualitative research is to arrive at some general,
overall appreciation of a phenomenon—highlighting interesting aspects and perhaps generating specific hypotheses. In contrast, quantitative research is typically
designed to test relatively specific predictions. Qualitative research thus provides an initial description of a phenomenon, whereas quantitative research aims to investigate its various details. Some examples of qualitative
methods include focus groups, surveys, naturalistic observations, interviews, content analyses of archival material, and case studies. What these approaches share is an
emphasis on revealing some general pattern by observing a few particular cases.

Focus groups are commonly used by marketing or
advertising agencies to derive information about people’s reactions to a particular product or event. A small
number of people, often fewer than 10, are asked their
opinions. A focus group engaged by the marketing department of a breakfast cereal company, for example,
might be asked how appealing the cereal looks, whether
the box would make them consider buying it, and how
agreeable the cereal’s texture and taste were. A facilitator would encourage the participants to share their opinions and reactions in the context of a group discussion.
The session would be taped and transcribed. Researchers
would then use the information to make their product
more appealing. Naturalistic observations involve studying individuals in their natural environments. One common variant consists of participant observation research
in which the researcher, in order to understand it, becomes part of a particular group. George Kirkham was a
criminologist who took a year off from his university position to work as a police patrolman. He then wrote
about the changes in his attitudes and values that occurred when he worked in high-crime neighborhood.
There are several drawbacks to qualitative methods
of inquiry. Firstly, the results are always subject to personal biases. A person who is interviewed, for example,
is stating their version of the truth. Personal perspectives
invariably affect what the individual believes and understands. Similarly, the results reported by the researcher
conducting a naturalistic observation will be tainted by
that researcher’s individual interpretation of the events.
Further, while case studies are rich sources of information about individuals, it is risky to assume that the information can be generalized to the rest of the population.
Moreover, analyzing the data from qualitative research
can be difficult, since open-ended questions and naturalistic observation leave room for so much variability between individuals that comparisons are difficult. Finally,
although it may be tempting for researchers to infer
cause and effect relationships from the results of naturalistic observations, interviews, archival data and case

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

531

Qualitative methods

studies, this would be irresponsible. Qualitative methods
rarely attempt to control any of the factors that affect situations, so although one factor may appear to have
caused an event, its influence cannot be confirmed without conducting more precise investigations. There is thus
a tradeoff between flexibility and precision.
The advantages of doing qualitative research are
numerous. One of the most important of these is that the
flexibility of qualitative data collection methods can
provide researchers access to individuals who would be
unable or unwilling to respond in more structured formats. For this reason, much research on children is qualitative. Naturalistic observations of children are sometimes undertaken to assess social dynamics. For example, covert videotaping of elementary school playgrounds has revealed that bullying and aggression are
far more common than most teachers and parents realize, and that bullying is not uncommon among girls.
Similarly, comparative psychologists learn a lot about
the social, behavioral, and cognitive abilities of animals
by studying them in their natural habitats. A further advantage of this type of research is that the validity of the
results is not jeopardized by the laboratory environment. An animal or child may not act the way they usu-

532

ally would in their natural surroundings if they are studied in a laboratory.
Another important application of qualitative research is in the study of new areas of interest, or topics
about which not very much is known. Qualitative research usually yields a lot of information. In contrast
with quantitative research, the information gathered by
qualitative researchers is usually broadly focused. This
means that qualitative methods can yield information
about the major factors at play, highlighting areas that
might warrant more in-depth quantitative study. Although many researchers believe quantitative methods to
be superior to qualitative methods, the two are probably
best seen as complementary. Qualitative research can
suggest what should be measured and in what way, while
controlled quantitative studies may be the most accurate
way of doing the actual measuring.
Timothy E. Moore
Further Reading
Murray, J. “Qualitative methods.” International Review of Psychiatry, vol 10, no. 4 (1998): 312-316.
Marecek, J. “Qualitative methods and social psychology.”
Journal of Social Issues vol 53, no. 4 (1997): 631-644.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

R
Race and intelligence
Throughout human history, people have tended to
divide each other into groups. Most often, physical characteristics are used to distinguish between groups, and
the groups are called races. Some people have long believed that many characteristics about a person could be
determined by simply looking at the person’s race. Intelligence is one trait that has been studied in an attempt to
correlate it to racial groups. In fact, at present the best
evidence does not strongly support the idea that the people of any race are more or less intelligent than those of
any other race. In addition, intelligence testing is an imperfect science. Traditional tests are skewed to favor certain segments of society.

Genes and intelligence: a clear verdict
Saying that intelligence is partly genetic—programmed in the genes and inherited from one generation
to the next—is vastly different than saying that genes underlie any racial differences. To give a classic example,
scatter two identical groups of seed on a rich and a barren,
dry plot of land. Within the rich plot, genetics will determine any difference in seed growth. But environment
will cause most of the difference between the two plots.
Studies estimate that genes account for between 30
and 80% of our intelligence. Using meta-analysis—a statistical method that allows researchers to compare data
from different experiments—a group of researchers
showed that, when all these studies are taken together,
genetics appear to determine roughly half of intelligence,
environment the other half. Interestingly, the meta-analysis also suggested that pre-birth environmental factors
such as the mother’s nutrition, which are difficult to
measure in any study, might underlie most of the environmental difference.
These results make some common sense. We know
that intelligent people tend to have intelligent children—
but not always. Some studies have also suggested that in-

tensive programs may make a large difference in disadvantaged children’s intelligence quotient (IQ) scores.
The problem with this split is that unrecognized differences in either genetic inheritance or environment
might skew otherwise carefully crafted studies of race
and intelligence. This problem will haunt nearly every
single study we discuss.

Race and IQ: not so clear
The question of whether human races possess different intellectual capacities comes, at least in part, from an
early twentieth-century observation that African Americans’ IQ scores were, on the average, 15 points lower
than those of white Americans. Recently, the black/white
IQ difference has decreased; today it’s closer to 10 points.
It’s difficult to see how a five-point change in the IQ
difference between black and white Americans could
have come about in less than a century if genetics caused
the difference entirely. Even more interesting, Americans
and western Europeans today score 15 points higher on
identical IQ tests than their great-grandparents did. A 15point difference in IQ is significant (an IQ of 100 is “average,” 130 “gifted”); but we clearly aren’t more intelligent than our great-grandparents. It seems that environmental factors can and do play havoc with our attempts
to measure intelligence.
A number of researchers have undertaken studies to
uncover the source of the 10-point IQ difference between
the races. One type of study measures the IQs of children
of different racial backgrounds who are raised in similar
environments. African Americans, on the average, have
70% African and 30% European ancestry. If whites were
genetically more intelligent than blacks, we would expect black children with more European ancestry to have
higher IQs than those with more African ancestry, even
when they’re raised in the same family.
Psychologists have used three ways to estimate white
ancestry in African Americans. (It is worth noting that
there are no “pure” racial groups.) Skin color is an imper-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

533

Racism

fect measure, because not all native African peoples have
dark skin. Also, children with lighter skin may be treated
differently, even in the same family. Family histories of
white ancestry may or may not be accurate. Possibly the
best method tests blood groups; different racial groups
have different rates of certain blood groups, allowing one
to make a statistical estimate of ancestry.
The results of these studies suggest little, if any, intelligence difference between the races. The skin-color
studies do tend to show a slight advantage for lighterskinned children—with all the reservations about children with lighter skin getting different treatment. But
family history and blood group studies show no difference in IQ, apart from the skin-color effect.
Another approach to these studies measures the IQs
of black children brought up in white families. In one
study of black, interracial, and white adopted children
raised in white families, the white children showed the
highest IQ scores, with interracial children scoring in the
middle. But it’s not clear whether the white families
treated the black children differently; whether the black
children had suffered from IQ-reducing environments
before they were born; or whether the older average age
of adoption for the black children in the study prevented
a fair comparison.
Another study, of black West Indian (Caribbean)
children and English children raised in an orphanage in
England, found that the Caribbean children had higher
IQs than those from England, with mixed-race children
scoring in between. But were the black children given
more attention by orphanage staff? Were particularly intelligent Caribbeans emigrating to England for better
economic opportunity?
Finally, a study of black children adopted by white
versus black families in America showed that the black
children raised by whites had higher IQ scores than those
raised by blacks—suggesting an environmental cause.
When the studies are taken together, the many caveats
involved with the role of genetics and environment make
it hard to draw firm conclusions. But the balance of data
suggests no racial difference in intelligence.
See also Intelligence quotient; Culture-fair test
Kenneth B. Chiacchia

Further Reading
Devlin, B., Michael Daniels, and Kathryn Roeder. “The Heritability of IQ.” Nature 388 (1997): 468-71.
Holloway, Marguerite. “Flynn’s Effect.” Scientific American
(January 1999).
534

Jencks, Christopher and Meredith Phillips, eds. The BlackWhite Test Score Gap. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution Press, 1998.
McGue, Matt. “The Democracy of the Genes.” Nature 388
(1997): 417-18.
Plomin, Robert. “Genetics and General Cognitive Ability.” Nature 402 (supplement) (1999): C25-C29.
Plomin, Robert and Stephen A. Petrill. “Genetics and Intelligence: What’s New?” Intelligence 24, no. 1 (1997): 53-77.
Wickelgren, Ingrid. “Nurture Helps Mold Able Minds.” Science 283, no. 5409 (1999): 1832-834.

Racism
The belief that members of one (or more) races are
inferior to members of other races.

Racism is most commonly used to describe the belief that members of one’s own race are superior physically, mentally, culturally, and morally to members of
other races. Racist beliefs provide the foundation for extending special rights, privileges, and opportunities to
the race that is believed to be superior, and to withholding rights, privileges, and opportunities from the races
believed to be inferior. No scientific evidence supports
racist claims, although racism exists in all countries and
cultures. The definition of racism has evolved to describe
prejudice against a group of people based on the belief
that human groups are unequal genetically, and that
members of some racial groups are thus inferior. Sociologists distinguish between individual racism, a term describing attitudes and beliefs of individuals, and institutional racism, which denotes governmental and organizational policies that restrict minority groups or demean
them by the application of stereotypes. While such policies are being corrected to eliminate institutional racism,
individual racism nonetheless persists.
Scientists have acknowledged individual differences
among ethnic and racial groups, citing the importance of
environment in shaping performance and measurable
ability. When test results appear to indicate differences in
ability and performance that follow racial lines, the effect
of environment must be considered in interpreting the results. In addition, tests and other instruments for evaluating ability may be biased to favor knowledge and experiences of one racial or ethnic group over others. Thus, test
scores must be analyzed with great caution with regard to
patterns of performance and their relationship to race.
By studying genetic patterns in humans, scientists
have demonstrated that genetic differences between
races are not very significant. As humans migrate from
continent to continent and ethnic groups intermingle,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Ethnocentrism; Eugenics
Further Reading
Balibar, Etienne. “Racism and Anti-Racism.” UNESCO Courier (March 1996): 14+.
Dawes, Kwame. “Clothed Against Naked Racism.” World
Press Review (April 1996): 32+.
Jacquard, Albert. “An Unscientific Notion.” UNESCO Courier
(March 1996): 22+.
Wieviorka, Michel. “The Seeds of Hate: Racism and Nationalism After World War II.” UNESCO Courier (March
1996): 104+.

the resident expert on mythology, literature, and philosophy. With financial support from Freud, Rank earned his
Ph.D. from the University of Vienna in 1912, with the first
ever dissertation on psychoanalysis. Entitled The Lohengrin Legend, it was published in 1911. Rank was the first
psychoanalyst without a medical degree.
Rank lived with Freud and together they trained
psychoanalysts from all over the world. However as
Freud’s favorite, he engendered the anger and jealousy
of other Freud disciples. Rank edited Freud’s The Interpretation of Dreams, co-edited their psychoanalytic journals, and became director of their publishing house. In
1918 in Poland, while serving in the Austrian army,
Rank married Beata “Tola” Mincer, who also joined
Freud’s circle and became a psychoanalyst. Their only
child, a daughter, was born in 1919.

Otto Rank
1884-1939
Austrian psychoanalyst and collaborator of Sigmund Freud, who developed theories of will and
birth trauma.

Otto Rank was Sigmund Freud’s closest collaborator for 20 years. Later, he strongly influenced the development of psychotherapy in the United States. He was
the first psychoanalyst to examine mother-child relationships, including separation anxiety. He also was one of
the first to practice a briefer form of psychotherapy,
called “active therapy.” His work, in contrast to orthodox
Freudian psychology, emphasized free will, relationships, and creativity. Many of Rank’s ideas, including
the importance of the ego, consciousness, and the present, have become mainstays of psychoanalytic theory.
Born in Vienna, Austria, in 1884, Otto Rosenfeld
changed his name to Otto Rank as an adolescent. It was
one of his first acts of “self-creation.” The second son of
Simon Rosenfeld, a jeweler, and Karoline Fleischner, the
family could only afford a higher education for one son.
Rank attended trade school, despite recurring bouts of
rheumatic fever, and became a locksmith, while his
brother studied law. In 1904, Rank suffered a suicidal depression, after which he experienced a spiritual rebirth.

Hired by Freud
Rank was extremely well-read in literature and philosophy. After discovering the works of Freud, he wrote
an essay that applied Freud’s theory of dreams to the creativity of artists. On reading the essay, Freud was so impressed that in 1906 he hired Rank as the secretary of the
newly founded Vienna Psychoanalytic Society. Soon,
Rank was a member of the “Committee of Seven,” Freud’s
inner circle. Although only 22, Rank was considered to be

Breaks with Freud
In The Trauma of Birth, published in German in
1924 and in English in 1929, Rank extended Freud’s
ideas to mother-child relationships. He viewed the
child’s separation from the mother at birth and weaning
as the basis of neurosis and argued that the male sex
drive was a desire to return to the womb. Rank’s therapy
involved re-experiencing the trauma of birth. On a trip to
the United States in 1924, Rank lectured on his own
ideas as well as Freud’s. Although Freud originally
praised Rank’s new work, soon he was attacking him,
and they broke off their relationship in 1926. Rank
moved his family to Paris and began spending a great
deal of time in the United States, lecturing and treating
patients. His new “active therapy” stressed a more equal
relationship between the patient and therapist, with a
focus on terminating the analysis, as opposed to the
open-ended and intensive psychoanalysis of Freud. The
Freudians labeled Rank as mentally ill, and he was expelled from the American Psychoanalytic Association.
To remain in the Association, those who had undergone
analysis with Rank were forced to undergo analysis
again with a Freudian practitioner.
Rank was a prolific writer. His works included a
700-page survey, The Incest Theme in Literature and
Legend, first published in 1912. Between 1926 and 1931,
he wrote important works on developmental psychology, education, and therapeutic methods. The English
translation of an expanded version of his early essay on
art, Art and Artist, appeared in 1932. In sharp contrast to
Freudian principles, Will Therapy (1936) stressed consciousness, choice, responsibility, and action. Rank argued that neurotics were failed artists who could regain
their will through analysis, in a process of self-creation
or rebirth.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

535

Otto Rank

racial categories will have less meaning, but prejudice is
not likely to disappear.

Rape

Emigrates to the United States
With the rise of Nazi Germany, Rank, a Jew, emigrated to the United States in 1935. Teaching at the Pennsylvania School of Social Work, he adopted the nickname
“Huck,” after his favorite American book, The Adventures
of Huckleberry Finn. Rank and his wife separated in
1934. Three months before his death in New York City in
1939, from side effects of the sulfa drug he was taking for
a kidney infection, Rank married Estelle Buel.
Rank has never received full credit for his contributions to psychoanalysis and psychotherapy, primarily because of the attacks by Freudians. Although Rank abhorred the Nazis, in 1939 the psychologist Erich
Fromm labeled Rank’s “will therapy” a Nazi-style philosophy. Rank’s work was ignored for years, until the
1970s when it was resurrected by the psychologists
Rollo May and Carl Rogers, among others, and by writers such as Anaïs Nin. The Journal of the Otto Rank Association, with writings by Rank and his followers, was
published biannually from 1966 until 1983. Rank’s 1930
work, Psychology and the Soul, was finally published in
English in 1998.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Lieberman, E. James. Acts of Will: The Life and Work of Otto
Rank: With a New Preface. Amherst, MA: University of
Massachusetts Press, 1993.
Menaker, Esther. Otto Rank: A Rediscovered Legacy. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1982.
Rudnytsky, Peter L. The Psychoanalytic Vocation: Rank, Winnicott, and the Legacy of Freud. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1991.
Taft, Jessie. Otto Rank: A Biographical Study Based on Notebooks, Letters, Collected Writings, Therapeutic Achievements and Personal Associations. New York: Julian Press,
1958.

Rape
Sexual intercourse forced on a person without the
person’s consent.

Rape is essentially an act of power and dominance.
Although an estimated 15 to 40 percent of American
women are victims of rape or attempted rape, men are
raped as well. Women are more likely to be raped by
someone they know; between 50 and 70 percent of all
rapes occur within the context of a romantic relationship,
and more than half the time the assault takes place in the
536

victim’s home. Rape is one of the most underreported
crimes in the United States, due to the victim’s fear of
embarrassment, humiliation, or retaliation by the rapist.
Estimates of the percentage of rapes reported to authorities range from 10 to 50 percent. Because of the difficulty of obtaining a conviction, about two percent of all
rapists are convicted, and most serve approximately half
of their original sentence.
A survey conducted in 1987 found that 57 percent
of women who have been raped develop post-traumatic
stress disorder. These women may lose their appetite,
become easily startled, and suffer from headaches,
sleep disorders, or fatigue. Many women have difficulty maintaining a normal life following a rape, and may
repress the experience for an extended period before
they are able to talk about it. Over the past 20 years
feminist organizations have fought successfully to
change public attitudes toward rape as well as treatment
of rape victims. Efforts have been made to increase the
sensitivity of police and hospital personnel to rape victims through special training programs. Today, women
police officers routinely investigate rape cases. Rape
crisis centers in local communities throughout the nation counsel rape victims and perform other services,
such as instruction on rape prevention, providing hotline services and legal advice, and supplying hospital
emergency room advocates to offer emotional support
to victims and assure that they are treated fairly by
physicians and the police.
Despite these and other advances in combating
rape, it remains a difficult crime to prosecute. Traditionally, rape victims have been questioned about their
sexual histories, although most states now place restrictions on the admissibility and usage of such information at trial. In some states, evidence by witnesses or
proof of bodily injury to the victim are still required; in
other states, a struggle between the woman and her attacker must be proven. Most states require physical evidence of recent sexual intercourse in which the victim
most undergo a medical examination within 24 hours of
the assault.
In recent years, increased attention has been focused
on “date” or “acquaintance” rape, a widespread phenomena that is particularly insidious because women who are
victimized in this way are more likely to blame themselves and are less likely to seek help or prosecute their
attackers. A 1987 study of acquaintance rape at 32 college campuses sponsored by Ms. magazine found that
one in four women surveyed were victims of rape or attempted rape, that most rape victims knew their attackers, and over half the assaults were date rapes. Only 27
percent of the women identified themselves as rape victims, and five percent reported the rapes to police. Of the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Offender was a stranger

68,140

Rate per 1,000 persons for cases involving strangers

0.3

Offender was a nonstranger*

72,790

Rate per 1,000 persons for cases involving nonstrangers

0.4

*A “nonstranger” offender is someone who is either related to, well-known to, or casually acquainted with the victim. Source:
Statistics on Crime & Punishment, p. 32.

acquaintance rape victims in the Ms. magazine survey,
38 percent were between 14 and 17 years old. Rape can
be particularly devastating for adolescents; the damage it
inflicts on the victim’s sense of personal integrity interferes with the fragile personal identity and sense of selfesteem that are being forged during this period. It also
upsets the adolescent’s need to assert some control over
her environment. Young rape victims, who are often
sexually inactive at the time of the attack, may have their
ideas and feelings about sex distorted by the experience.
Often, they have daily encounters with their attacker or
his friends at school or social events, adding to their
sense of shame and humiliation. Most are unlikely to report the rape to parents or other adults, fearing they will
be blamed or that their parents may press charges against
their own wishes.

hardest to waken during REM sleep. The contradictions
between the active, “awake” features of REM sleep and
its soundness have caused some people to refer to REM
sleep as “paradoxical sleep.” At birth about 50 percent
of all sleep is REM sleep, but by the age of 10 this figure
drops to 25 percent.
In the course of a night, periods of REM sleep occur
every 90 to 100 minutes, becoming longer as the night
progresses, in contrast to the deeper stage four sleep,
most of which occurs early in the night. About 80 percent of the time, people awakened from REM sleep will
say they have been dreaming, while those awakened during other sleep stages rarely report dreams. Experiments

Further Reading
Brownmiller, Susan. Against Our Will: Men, Women, and
Rape. Bantam, 1986.
Guernsey, JoAnn B. The Facts about Rape. Crestwood, 1990.
Parrot, Andrea. Coping with Date Rape and Acquaintance
Rape. Rosen Publishers, 1988.

Rapid eye movement (REM)
The stage of sleep most closely associated with
dreaming.

First described in 1953 by Nathaniel Kleitman and
Eugene Aserinsky, rapid eye movement (REM) sleep is
also called active sleep because the EEG ( electroencephalogram) patterns in this stage are similar to the patterns during the awake stage. The four stages of slowwave, or non-REM, sleep are accompanied by deep
breathing, a relatively slow heartbeat, and lowered blood
pressure. In contrast, levels of physiological arousal during REM sleep resemble those of the waking state. In
some ways, however, people are more deeply asleep during the REM stage than at other times: the major muscle
groups go limp in a sort of paralysis, and people are

REM sleep decreases from about 50 percent of a newborn
baby’s sleep to about 25 percent by age 10.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

537

Rapid eye movement (REM)

RAPE: DOES THE VICTIM KNOW THE OFFENDER?

Rating scale

have shown that people repeatedly awakened during the
REM stage for several nights will compensate by spending twice as much time in REM sleep the first night they
are left alone, an observation that has led to much speculation about the role of this type of sleep.
Some researchers have hypothesized that REM
sleep strengthens neural connections in the brain, a
theory supported by the fact that infants and children,
whose brains are still developing, require larger
amounts of REM sleep than adults. It has also been
suggested that REM sleep may be linked to a specific
neurotransmitter, norepinephrine, which helps maintain alertness when people are awake. In addition, REM
sleep has been investigated in connection with learning
and memory in studies that showed decreased retention
of learned skills in persons who were deprived of REM
sleep. However, a contrasting (and controversial) theory maintains that the REM stage is a way for the body
to “empty” the brain so that its neural networks do not
become overloaded.
Further Reading
Hartmann, Ernest. The Functions of Sleep. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press, 1973.
Hobson, J. Allan. Sleep. New York: Scientific American Library, 1989.
——— . The Dreaming Brain. New York: Basic Books, 1988.

Rating scale
Any instrument designed to assist in the measurement of subjective evaluations of, or reactions to, a
person, object, event, statement, or other item of
interest.

Several varieties of rating scales have been developed. One common form of rating scale presents the
rater with a spectrum of potential responses that includes antithetical elements at each end of a range of
intermediate possibilities, on which the rater is expected to indicate the position that most accurately represents the rater’s response to the subject in question. Another form of rating scale presents the rater with a list
of characteristics or attributes from which the rater is
expected to select those which the rater believes apply
to the subject in question. Rating scale instruments are
used in psychological research primarily to assess qualities for which no objective measurement techniques
have been developed.
Further Reading
Bech, Per. Rating Scales for Psychopathology, Health Status,
and Quality of Life. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1993.
538

Rational-emotive behavior
therapy
A therapeutic technique that reduces maladaptive
behaviors by showing clients that their behavior is
caused by irrational thoughts.

Rational-emotive behavior therapy (REBT) belongs to a class of therapies termed “cognitive-behavioral” therapies. The defining features of these therapies
are an emphasis on achieving measurable goals by manipulating internal and external reinforcers. That is, cognitive-behavioral therapists help clients identify the
thoughts and beliefs that might be prolonging their distress or anxiety. The assumption is that attitudes and expectations that we have for ourselves influence how we
cope and respond to challenge.
Rational-emotive behavior therapy is the creation of
psychologist Albert Ellis. Ellis believes that people are
born with a predisposition to be either rational or irrational, and that mental disorders are the product of
faulty learning. Specifically, REBT conceptualizes psychological disturbances as the products of maladaptive
and irrational cognitions (thoughts) that have been
learned, and which cause and are in turn caused by emotions and behaviors. It is not only the events in our lives,
but also our interpretation of those events that can cause
psychological disturbances. This is an optimistic theory,
inasmuch as it predicts that, since mental disorders are
the result of learning, they can be unlearned. The ultimate goals of REBT are to teach clients to think more
rationally, to feel more appropriately, and to behave
more adaptively.
As a therapy, REBT is active and sometimes confrontational. Cognitive, emotive, and behavioral methods are used in combination to facilitate client change.
Some of the cognitive methods include: disputing irrational beliefs (e.g., pointing out how irrational it would
be for a client to believe he/she had to be good at
everything in order to consider himself/herself worthwhile); thought stopping (the therapist interrupts the
maladaptive thought by yelling “STOP”); reframing
(situations are looked at from a more positive angle);
and problem solving. The emotive techniques, including role playing, modeling, the use of humor, and
shame-attacking exercises, are all aimed at diffusing
the upsetting emotions connected with certain behaviors or situations. Finally, behavioral techniques such
as the use of homework assignments, risk-taking exercises, systematic desensitization (which involves incremental exposure to the frightening situation while
focusing on remaining relaxed), and bibliotherapy

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

REBT uses something called the ABCDE model to
help clients understand how their thoughts, feelings,
and behaviors are related. The A stands for “activating
events,” which are related to rational or irrational “beliefs” (B). The beliefs involve “consequences” (C),
which, if the belief is irrational, may be emotional disturbances. The D represents the therapist “disputing”
the irrational belief and the E stands for the more “effective” way of thinking that marks success with
REBT.
Consider, as an example, a student who performs
badly on an exam. The poor grade is the activating event.
The student’s irrational belief is that, because of this bad
grade, he or she is neither intelligent nor a worthwhile
person. The consequence is depressed mood and perhaps
feelings of anxiety connected to test-taking. These reactions could, in turn, result in avoidance of classes and
tests or withdrawal from academically related activities.
In REBT, the therapist would dispute the student’s belief
that the bad grade represents incompetence or worthlessness. The therapist would help the student to adopt more
effective behaviors and beliefs, such as the belief that the
poor grade is simply a reflection of course difficulty or
the student’s inadequate preparation, rather than a measure of the student’s worth as a person.
REBT has been extensively researched. Many studies have demonstrated its success in treating various psychological troubles ranging from depression to anxiety
disorders and even eating disorders such as bulimia.
Additionally, REBT has been shown to work in both individual and group counseling settings. Because REBT
teaches clients to monitor and alter their thoughts, feelings and behaviors, it teaches clients to help themselves.
This feature is one of its greatest strengths, and is reflected in low relapse rates, compared to drug treatment in
the absence of any accompanying therapy. Further advantages of REBT include its rapid symptom reduction
and the short duration of therapy; therapeutic goals are
frequently achieved within 10 to 20 sessions.
Timothy Moore

Reaction time
Generally, in psychological measurement, the interval of time between the presentation of a stimulus to a subject and the beginning of the subject’s
response to that stimulus.

Several categories of reaction time, such as simple
reaction time, have been established and studied in experimental psychology. In a simple reaction time experiment, the subject is presented with one simple stimulus,
such as a light, and instructed to perform one simple response, such as pressing a button. In a discrimination reaction time experiment, the subject is presented with one
of two or more different stimuli, such as a red light and a
green light, and instructed to perform a response to only
one of the stimuli, such as pressing a button when the red
light is presented but not when the green light is presented. In a choice reaction time experiment, the subject is
presented with one of two or more different stimuli, such
as a red light and a green light, and instructed to perform
different responses depending upon which stimulus is
presented, such as pressing a red button when the red
light is presented and pressing a green button when the
green light is presented. There are other types, and many
variations of reaction time experiments.

Readiness test
A test designed to assess the developmental condition of an individual to determine whether or not,
or to what extent, the individual could gain from
some particular experience.

Readiness tests are commonly used in educational
situations, and often include the measurement of cognitive, perceptual, emotional, motivational, and other factors involved in the learning process, in an attempt to determine if a student is in a position to benefit from a particular course of instruction. Readiness tests are based on
the view, shared by almost all psychologists, that an individual reaches maturityin various areas only by passing
through corresponding series of consecutive developmental levels, and that these series of levels are essentially similar in all normal individuals.

Further Reading
Capuzzi, D., & Gross, D. Counselling & Psychotherapy: Theories and Interventions. New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1999.
Ellis, A. & Blau, S. “Rational emotive behavior therapy.” Directions in Clinical and Counseling Psychology, 8, 41-56,
1993.
GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Reality therapy
A therapeutic approach in which a therapist helps
a client understand the reality of the world around
them and how to function accordingly.
539

Reality therapy

(reading about the disorder) are all used to teach
clients that they can safely and comfortably substitute
adaptive behaviors for the maladaptive ones they have
relied on in the past.

Reflective listening

Reality therapy was developed by William Glasser,
who wrote a book of the same name in the 1960s. This
type of counseling suggests that all psychiatric subjects
have the same basic underlying problem, namely an inability to fulfill their essential needs. Specific problems,
like alcoholism or misbehavior in school, are the symptoms and not the problem. Troublesome symptoms occur
when a person cannot or will not meet their needs.

Language of reality therapy
Essential needscan be broken down into two categories. One is the need to love and be loved at all times
during the course of a lifetime. The other is the need to
feel worthwhile to oneself and others. In order to feel
worthwhile, one must maintain a satisfactory standard of
behavior. In other words, if a person is drinking to avoid
facing reality, then he or she is not maintaining a satisfactory standard of behavior and not feeling worthwhile.
Everyone has these essential needs but peoples’s abilities
to fulfill them vary.
The process of fulfilling the essential needs requires,
first and foremost, involvement with other people who
are in touch with the reality of the world. Without involvement with other people, we try to fulfill the basic
needs in unhealthy ways, like overeating or abusing
drugs. Not knowing how to fulfill essential needs always
leads to pain, either physical or emotional, for the client
or those around him or her. Reality therapy holds that
any time a person comes to therapy, they are lacking a
true involvement with a healthy person. A therapist can
be the person who becomes healthily involved with a
client. Since fulfilling essential needs is part of person’s
present life, reality therapy does not concern itself with a
client’s past. Neither does this type of therapy deal with
unconscious mental processes. In these two ways reality
therapy is very different from other forms of psychology
like psychoanalysis.
Reality therapy tends not to use typical psychology
labels, like “neurotic” or “dysfunctional,” because these
terms tend to stereotype people. Responsibility and irresponsibility are two terms commonly used in reality therapy. Responsibility refers to the ability to fulfill one’s
needs and to do so in a way that doesn’t interfere with
someone else fulfilling their needs. Irresponsible people
cannot fulfill their own needs, or they fulfill their needs
at the cost of negatively affecting someone else. For example, responsible students do their own homework. Irresponsible students look for someone else to do their
work. If a parent does the homework for the child, the
parent is also being irresponsible. The student who doesn’t do their homework is harming his or her learning
process and being a burden on those around them. The
540

parent who does the homework is harming the student by
not teaching that child responsibility. Reality therapy
holds that we learn responsibility through involvement
with another responsible person. We can learn and relearn responsibility at any time in life.

Procedure
The procedure of reality therapy is basically threefold. First, an involvement must be established between the
therapist and the client. This means a firm emotional bond
must be established fairly quickly through discussing all
aspects of a client’s current life. This way the client begins
to understand that the therapist cares and also that the therapist is a responsible person who can help clarify the reality of the client’s world. It has been suggested that through
this involvement a client also develops increased selfworth. Once involvement has been established, the therapist begins rejecting the unrealistic or irresponsible behavior of the client. The therapist points out irresponsible behavior. Irresponsible behavior is never justified, nor is it
viewed as caused by anyone but the client. The therapist
expects and encourages new behavior that is builds confidence in the client. Finally, the therapist acts as a guide or a
teacher of responsible behavior. Clients learn that happiness can only be gained by being responsible. A therapist
illuminates a client’s hopes, helps a person expand a range
of interests, and teaches a client to recognize his or her
own needs and use new behaviors to fulfill those needs.
Lara Lynn Lane
Further Reading
Collins, Perry L. “The historical development of reality therapy.” TCA Journal vol. 25(2) Fall 1997, 50-57.
Glasser, William, M.D. Reality Therapy: A New Approach to
Psychiatry. NY: Harper & Row, Publishers, 1965.
Glasser, William. Reality Therapy in Action. NY, US: Harpercollins Publishers, 2000.

Further Information
William Glasser Institute. 22024 Lassen Street, Suite 118,
Chatsworth, CA, USA. 91311, fax: 818-700-0555, 800899-0688. Email: wginst@earthlink.net.
www.glasserinst.com.

Reflective listening
Listening practice used by psychotherapists that requires focus, intent, and very active participation.

Very often in Western culture, listening is considered to be the passive part of a conversation while

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

By re-stating or reflecting what clients have expressed, the clients then listen to what they have said in a
new way. They hear their feelings and thoughts in a different voice and can look at their life through another’s
eyes. Such therapy also helps a client to feel validated.
This type of re-stating what has been heard is also called
mirroring. This technique can be used in one-to-one therapy or group therapy.
Lara Lynn Lane
Further Reading
Baker, Ann C. and Patricia J. Jensen and David A. Kolb. In
Conversation: Transforming Experience into Learning.
Simulation and Gaming, Vol 28(1), March 1997, pp. 6-12.
Gerwood, Joseph B. Nondirective Counseling Interventions
with Schizophrenics. Psychological Reports, vol. 73,
pp.1147-1151. 1993.
Rogers, Carl. Client-Centered Therapy: Its Current Practice,
Implications, and Theory. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Company, (1951)1965.
Sahakian, William S. History and Systems of Psychology. NY
and London: Schenkman Publishing Co., 1975.

Reflexes
Movements or involuntary reponses initiated by an
external stimulus which do not require input from
the brain.

In a simple reflex, a sensory receptor initiates a
nerve impulse in an afferent sensory nerve fiber which
conducts it to the spinal cord. In the gray matter of the
spinal cord, the afferent nerve impulse is fired over the
synaptic gap to an efferent motor fiber which passes
along the impulse to the appropriate muscle, producing
the reflex.
There are other reflexes which involve neural pathways connected to the brain. When an ice cube is
touched, cold receptors in the skin are stimulated and that
afferent information is transmitted to the gray matter of
the spinal cord, where it then travels via axons in the white
matter to the brain. There, the sensory information is analyzed and movement such as dropping the ice cube (or
keeping hold of it) may be initiated. This message is sent
down the axons of the white matter to the appropriate
motor nerves in the gray matter. This efferent motor information travels to the muscles which initiate the reflex.

Rehabilitation
A process geared toward helping persons suffering
from an injury, disease, or other debilitating condition to reach their highest possible level of self-sufficiency.

Rehabilitation begins once a debilitating condition
has been evaluated and treatment is either in progress or
completed. Impairments are evaluated for their effects on
the individual’s psychological, social, and vocational
functioning. Depending on the type of disability involved, “self-sufficiency” may mean a full-time job, employment in a sheltered workshop, or simply an independent living situation. Rehabilitation involves a combination of medicine, therapy, education, or vocational training. There are special centers for various mental and
physical problems that require rehabilitation, including
psychiatric disorders, mental retardation, alcohol dependence, brain and spinal cord injuries, stroke, burns,
and other physically disabling conditions.
The goal of medical rehabilitation is the restoration
of normal functioning to the greatest degree possible.
Specialities involved include physical, occupational, and
speech therapy, recreation, psychology, and social work.
Medical rehabilitation facilities often include an “activi-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

541

Rehabilitation

speaking is seen as active. Reflective listening practices requires focus, intent, and very active participation. The term stems from work done by psychologist
Carl Rogers who developed client-centered therapy.
Rogers believed that by listening intently to the client,
a therapist could determine best what the client needed. This was unlike psychoanalysis, which had more
formula-like approaches that were used for all patients. Rogers wrote about reflection of attitudes,
which asserts that a therapist needs to have empathic
understanding with his/her client. Empathic understanding means understanding a person from his or
her frame of reference. What a therapist attempts to
do is reconstruct what the client is thinking and feeling and to relay this understanding back to the client.
By explaining that he or she understands what the
client is saying, a therapist is establishing a trust and
clarifying the client’s expression. For example, a
client may make a statement like, “My mother is such
a jerk. She’s always telling me what to do and won’t
let me do anything I want to do.” The therapist who
uses reflective listening might respond by saying, “So
you feel frustrated because you’re mother treats you
like a child instead of an adult.” This will allow the
client to feel understood and open up even more about
his or her feelings about being a teenager. Alternately,
a client may feel misunderstood and then try again to
explain what he or she is thinking or feeling. This will
also allow a therapist to make sure he or she is understanding the client.

Rehearsal

ties of daily living” (ADL) department, which offers activities in a simulated apartment setting where patients
may learn and practice tasks they will need in everyday
living. Also included in the field of medical rehabilitation is a special area called rehabilitation technology
(formerly rehabilitation engineering), developed during
the 1970s and 1980s, that deals with prosthetics (devices
attached to the body) and orthotics (equipment used by
disabled people). In addition to the actual engineers who
design these products, rehabilitation technology also includes professionals who serve as consultants to manufacturers on the design, production, and marketing of
medical devices.
Vocational rehabilitation helps the client achieve a
specific goal, which can be either a type of employment
(competitive, sheltered, volunteer) or a living situation.
Services include prevocational evaluation, work evaluation, work adjustment, job placement, and on-the-job
training. Facilities offering vocational rehabilitation include state-supported local units in hospitals, the Veterans Administration, sheltered workshops, insurance
companies, and speech and hearing clinics. Rehabilitation counseling is a relatively new field whose support
personnel offer a variety of services to the disabled, particularly that of coordinating and intergrating the various
types of assistance available to a particular client. The
rehabilitation counselor also assists in locating job opportunities, interpreting test results, and assisting with
personal problems.
Since the 1980s, supported employment (employment of the disabled through programs that provide them
with ongoing support services) has become increasingly
popular as a means of vocational rehabilitation. Traditionally, the most common form of supported employment has been the sheltered workshop, a nonprofit organization—often receiving government funds—that provides both services and employment to the disabled.
Today, sheltered industrial employment mainstreams disabled workers into the regular workplace with jobs modified to meet their needs, especially those of the severely
disabled. However, both cutbacks in funding for government support services and affirmative action provisions
of the 1973 Rehabilitation Act pertaining to federal contractors led to increasing private sector participation efforts in the 1980s. Some firms became involved in career
education, offering internships to disabled students,
which sometimes led to permanent employment. Other
recent trends include rehabilitation of persons with traumatic brain injuries and severe learning disabilities, and
rehabilitation of the homebound and the elderly.
The U. S. Department of Education administers
most federal programs for rehabilitation of the disabled,
often through its Office of Special Education and Reha542

bilitative Services (OSERS). Within OSERS, the Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA) supervises the
state offices of vocational rehabilitation. Organizations
involved in rehabilitation efforts include the National
Rehabilitation Association, the National Association of
Rehabilitation Facilities, and the President’s Committee
on Employment of People with Disabilities.
Further Information
American Paralysis Association 24-hour tool-free information
and referral hotline. (800) 526–3256.
National Association of Rehabilitation Facilities. P.O. Box
17675, Washington, D.C. 20041, (703) 648–9300.
National Rehabilitation Association. 633 S. Washington St.,
Alexandria, Virginia 22314, (703) 836–0850.
National Spinal Cord Injury Association . (800) 962–9629.

Rehearsal
Mental activities associated with committing information to memory.

Rehearsal is a term used by memory researchers to
refer to mental techniques for helping us remember information. Its technical meaning is not very different from
our everyday use of the term. Actors rehearse their lines
so that they won’t forget them. Similarly, if we want to
retain information over time, there are strategies for enhancing future recall. There are two main types of rehearsal. The first is maintenance rehearsal, which involves continuously repeating the to-be-remembered material. This method is effective in maintaining information over the short term. We have all had the experience
of looking up a phone number and subsequently forgetting it (or part of it) before we have dialed it. This illustrates the fact that new material will fade from memory
relatively quickly unless we make a purposeful effort to
remember it. One of the advantages of a touch tone telephone is that the number can be dialed more quickly
compared to the old rotary dial phones, thereby reducing
the length of time required to keep the number in memory. Maintenance rehearsal typically involves rote repetition, either out loud or covertly. It is effective for maintaining relatively small amounts in memory for brief periods, but is not likely to affect retention in the long term.
In order to retain information for longer periods of
time, elaborative rehearsal is more useful. This second
main type of rehearsal involves associating new material
with information that already exists in long-term memory. There are numerous occasions on which students are
required to remember large amounts of relatively complex information—certainly more complex than a phone

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Timothy Moore
Further Reading
Reisberg, D. Cognition: Exploring the science of the mind.
New York: Norton & Co., 1997.

Wilhelm Reich
1897-1957
Austrian psychoanalyst whose unorthodox ideas
contributed to the development of psychoanalytic
theory.

Although Wilhelm Reich is remembered primarily
for his legal battle with the United States Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) over their outlawing of his “orgone energy accumulator,” his earlier works were influential in the development of psychoanalysis. In The
Function of the Orgasm, published in German in 1927
and in English in 1942, Reich placed the drive for sexual
fulfillment at the center of human psychology and argued that neuroses resulted from sexual repression. In
his Character Analysis, published in Vienna in 1933 and
in the United States in 1949, he described how defensive
character traits were developed to cope with specific
emotions, and he argued that the goal of therapy was to
remove these repressive traits. These ideas have become
mainstays of psychoanalytic theory.
Born in 1897 in Dobrzcynica, in the region of Galacia that was part of the Austrian Empire, Reich’s family
soon moved to Jujinetz in Bukovina in the Ukrainian re-

gion of Austria. There his father, Leon Reich, raised cattle on a large estate. Reich was educated at home by tutors until age 14, when he entered the German gymnasium at Czernowitz. At 12, Reich told his father about an
affair between his mother, Cecile Roniger, and one of his
tutors. After a year of brutal beatings by her husband,
Reich’s mother committed suicide. Following his father’s death in 1914, Reich managed the farm and cared
for his younger brother while attending school. After
graduating in 1915, he joined the Austro-Hungarian
army, becoming an officer on the Italian front.

Becomes a disciple of Freud
With the end of World War I in 1918, Reich entered
medical school at the University of Vienna. There he encountered Sigmund Freud, joined the Vienna Psychoanalytic Society, and began practicing psychoanalysis. He
earned his M. D. in 1922 and married a fellow medical
student and psychoanalyst, Annie Pink. The couple had
two daughters. Reich continued to study psychiatry for
two more years at the Neurological and Psychiatric Clinic in Vienna. When Freud established the Psychoanalytic
Polyclinic in 1922, Reich was his first clinical assistant.
In 1928, Reich became vice-director. Between 1924 and
1930, he was also director of the Seminar for Psychoanalytic Theory. During this period, Reich developed his
theories of “character analysis” and his controversial theory of “orgastic potency,” that defined orgasm as the
basis for mental health.
In 1928, Reich joined the Communist Party and cofounded the Socialist Society for Sex Consultation and
Sexological Research, a clinic that provided workers
with sex education and birth control information. Reich’s
increasing interest in reconciling Marxism and psychoanalysis, culminating with his Dialectic Materialism and
Psychoanalysis, first published in Moscow in 1929, was
a factor in his break with Freud. Freud’s rejection left
him deeply depressed. He developed tuberculosis, which
had killed both his father and his brother, and spent several months in a sanitarium in Switzerland.

Attacked for unorthodox ideas
Reich moved to Berlin, Germany, in 1930, where he
continued to write prolifically and organize “mental hygiene” clinics for workers. In 1933 he published The
Mass Psychology of Fascism, an attack on Nazism which
emphasized the connections between personal and sexual issues and political issues. He found himself expelled
from the German Communist Party for his sexual and
psychoanalytic views, and from the International Psychoanalytic Association for his political views. His marriage also ended in 1933, and he entered into a marital

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

543

Wilhelm Reich

number. In these situations, reciting the information over
and over again is not going to help commit it to memory.
Such a strategy would be hopelessly inefficient and ineffective. Instead, elaboration strategies that engage the
learner in understanding the material are helpful, both
for storing information, and for retrieving it in the future.
Elaboration can take a variety of forms. For example the
learner can generate personal examples that help illustrate concepts or principles. Enriching the material by
concentrating on its meaning not only makes it more understandable, it also helps establish potential pathways
for subsequent retrieval. Study groups provide a context
for elaborative rehearsal. Discussions or arguments
about various topics will enrich the subject matter and
add to its meaningfulness. The most effective studying
techniques are those that enhance understanding. Trying
to explain a concept to a friend is a good way of testing
your own grasp of it, and at the same time engages you
in a form of elaborative rehearsal.

Reinforcement

relationship with Elsa Lindenberg, a dancer and fellow
communist. In 1934 Reich began moving across Europe,
first to Denmark, then Sweden, and finally settling in
Oslo, Norway. During this period, he developed his theory of “muscular armor,” the outward bodily attributes
that represent character traits; for example, a stubborn
person might develop a stiff neck. Reich used physical
methods in his therapy to break these patterns, methods
that were adopted by other therapies, including bioenergetics and Gestalt psychology. He published The Sexual
Revolution (1936), an indictment of conventional sexual
morality, and undertook experiments on energetic particles that he called “bions.” Reich believed that he had
discovered and could measure a new form of energy, the
“orgone,” which controlled sexual drive and love.
In Norway, Reich came under attack by both the
medical establishment and the press. In 1939, as a Jew
living under the growing Nazi threat, he emigrated to the
United States. Reich moved his laboratory from Oslo to
Long Island and lectured at the New School for Social
Research in New York City for the next two years. In
1940, he built his first “orgone energy accumulator,” or
“orgone box.” Reich claimed that this telephone boothsized machine trapped orgone energy, which could be
used to prevent and treat mental and physical illnesses,
particularly cancer. He described his research in The
Cancer Biopathy, published in 1948. In 1944, Reich had
a son with the German-born socialist, Ilse Ollendorff,
and the following year the family moved to Rangeley,
Maine, where Reich founded the Orgone Institute, with
research laboratories and a publishing house.
Reich and Ollendorff were divorced in 1954, the
same year that the FDA obtained an injunction against
his energy accumulator. The injunction made it a crime
not only to build or use the orgone box, but to even mention the term “orgone” in print. Reich defied the order.
He was found in contempt and, in March, 1957, sentenced to two years in the Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary in Pennsylvania. The following November, he died
of a heart attack in the psychiatric wing of the prison.
The FDA destroyed his remaining accumulators, as well
as many of his books on a variety of subjects. However
in recent years, Reich’s contributions to psychoanalysis
have been re-examined and many of his books have been
translated and reprinted.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Reich, Wilhelm. Passion of youth: an autobiography, 18971922. Edited by Mary Boyd Higgins and Chester M.
Raphael; translations by Philip Schmitz and Jerri Tompkins. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1988.
544

Reich, Wilhelm. Beyond psychology: letters and journals,
1934-1939. Edited by Mary Boyd Higgins; translations by
Philip Schmitz, Derek Jordan, and Inge Jordan. New
York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1994.
Reich, Wilhelm. American odyssey: letters and journals, 19401947. Edited by Mary Boyd Higgins; translations by
Derek Jordan, Inge Jordan, and Philip Schmitz. New
York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1999.
Sharaf, Myron. Fury on earth: a biography of Wilhelm Reich.
New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1983.
Wilson, Colin. The quest for Wilhelm Reich. Garden City, NY:
Doubleday, 1981.

Reinforcement
In either classical or operant conditioning, a stimulus that increases the probability that a particular
behavior will occur.

In classical (Pavlovian) conditioning, where the
response has no effect on whether the stimulus will
occur, reinforcement produces an immediate response
without any training or conditioning. When meat is offered to a hungry dog, it does not learn to salivate, the
behavior occurs spontaneously. Similarly, a negative reinforcer, such as an electric shock, produces an immediate, unconditioned escape response. To produce a
classically-conditioned response, the positive or negative reinforcer is paired with a neutral stimulus until the
two become associated with each other. Thus, if the
sound of a bell accompanies a negative stimulus such
as an electric shock, the experimental subject will eventually be conditioned to produce an escape or avoidance response to the sound of the bell alone. Once conditioning has created an association between a certain
behavior and a neutral stimulus, such as the bell, this
stimulus itself may serve as a reinforcer to condition
future behavior. When this happens, the formerly neutral stimulus is called a conditioned reinforcer, as opposed to a naturally positive or negative reinforcer,
such as food or an electric shock.
In operant conditioning (as developed by B. F.
Skinner), positive reinforcers are rewards that strengthen a conditioned response after it has occurred, such as
feeding a hungry pigeon after it has pecked a key. Negative reinforcers are unpleasant stimuli that are removed
when the desired response has been obtained. The application of negative reinforcement may be divided into
two types: escape and avoidance conditioning. In escape
conditioning, the subject learns to escape an unpleasant
or aversive stimulus (a dog jumps over a barrier to escape electric shock). In avoidance conditioning, the subject is presented with a warning stimulus, such as a

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Reinforcement may be administered according to
various schedules. A particular behavior may be reinforced every time it occurs, which is referred to as continuous reinforcement. In many cases, however, behaviors are reinforced only some of the time, which is
termed partial or intermittent reinforcement. Reinforcement may also be based on the number of responses or
scheduled at particular time intervals. In addition, it
may be delivered in regularly or irregularly. These variables combine to produce four basic types of partial reinforcement. In fixed-ratio (FR) schedules, reinforcement is provided following a set number of responses
(a factory worker is paid for every garment he assembles). With variable-ratio (VR) schedules, reinforcement is provided after a variable number of responses
(a slot machine pays off after varying numbers of attempts). Fixed-interval (FI) schedules provide for reinforcement of the first response made within a given interval since the previous one (contest entrants are not
eligible for a prize if they have won one within the past
30 days). Finally, with variable-interval (VI) schedules,
first responses are rewarded at varying intervals from
the previous one.
See also Avoidance learning; Behavior modification;
Classical conditioning; Pavlov, Ivan
Further Reading
Craighead, W. Edward. Behavior Modification: Principles, Issues, and Applications. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1976.
Skinner, B.F. About Behaviorism. New York:Knopf, 1974.

Religion and psychology
Psychologists have long studied religion and religious practices. Using principles of traditional psychology, researchers try to understand religious experience, including prayer, cults, and mystical experiences. The
study of religion and psychology began in the early
twentieth century, but faded before it was revived in the
1980s, when the American Psychological Association
began to formally investigate aspects of religion in psychology. The only classic text relating to the psychological study of religion, Varieties of Religious Experience,
was written by William James in 1902.
Sigmund Freud, who called religion an “illusion,”
nonetheless studied religion with great interest, and
wrote three books and some papers on his studies of how
religion impacted human lives. Later psychoanalysts has

studied the psychological value of religion. However,
only a few psychologists, including Paul Meehl, Erich
Fromm, Abraham Maslow, and Solomon Asch,
deemed belief systems, moral and ethical conduct, and
the reasons people abide by a certain religion as significant factors in human behavior.
Psychologist William James studied the intricate influences of religious conversions, mystical experience,
saintliness, and prayer on a person’s belief system.
Twenty-first century psychologists investigate such topics as cults, confession (particularly as it is practiced
among Roman Catholics), ritual, faith healing, and explanations for miracles. Modern psychologists actively
pursue the interrelationship between religion and psychology and note that just as religion influences human
existence, human perceptions also influence the practice
of religion.
Psychologists use various methods to study religion. They have used personal revelations, observation
through clinical means, participant observation, surveys
and interviews, and examinations of religious documents, treatises, and journals. All these methods must
be used to help psychologists understand such a complex topic. A concept such as faith is not easily categorized or discussed, despite scientific analysis. Understanding the psychological origins of religion is difficult
as well. Modern psychologists tend to focus their study
on individual practices rather than the historical nature
of religion as a whole. They look for psychological underpinnings of religion on modern people. This also
means that an individual’s religion and belief system
changes as that person ages. As their mental and emotional development progresses, so their image of God
and religion does also.
There are many areas of interest to psychologists.
Psychologists hold special interest in the social dynamics of religions and their organized structures. They
study the influence that these bodies have on the lives of
their members and the communities in which they exist.
Some psychologists analyze the workings of cults and
how these social groups differ from more traditional religions. Many psychologists and religious leaders are attempting to integrate theology and psychology through
these pursuits.
The ever-growing group of psychologists attempting to define the psychology of religion include the religiously devout as well as atheists and agnostics. In a
study published in the June 2000 issue of Health Psychology by the American Psychological Association,
Michael E. McCullough, of the National Institute of
Healthcare Research noted that “the odds of survival for
people who scored higher on measures of public and

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

545

Religion and psychology

buzzer, just before the aversive stimulus occurs and
learns to act on it in order to avoid the unpleasant stimulus altogether.

Research methodology
Research shows that religious people, like this man, tend to report greater happiness than non-religious people. (Bildarchiv
Preussischer Kulturbestiz. Reproduced with permission.)

private religious involvement were 20 percent higher
than those people who scored lower on such measures.”
The analysis was done of 42 different studies and examined 125,826 people, and shows a correlation between
participation in a religion and an increased life expectancy. As McCullough added, “this is a phenomenon
that deserves a lot more research attention than it has
traditionally received.” As a result, religion is likely to
become a central area of focus in psychology well into
the twenty-first century.
Jane Spear
Further Reading
Collins, G. R. Religion and Philosophy. Encyclopedia of Psychology, Second Edition. Ray Corsini, Ed. New York:
John Wiley & Sons 1994.
Neuhaus, Richard John. Religion and Psychology. National
Review, Feb. 19, 1988.

Further Information
American Psychological Association. 750 First Street, N.E.,
Washington, D.C., USA. 20002-4242, 202-336-5500,
800-374-2721.
546

Research methodology
The wide variety of strategies employed by psychologists to answer research questions.

Psychologists use a wide variety of techniques to
answer research questions. The most commonly used
techniques include experiments, correlational studies,
observational studies, case studies, and archival research.
Each approach has its own strengths and weaknesses.
Psychologists have developed a diversity of research
strategies because a single approach cannot answer all
types of questions that psychologists ask.
Psychologists prefer to use experiments whenever
possible because this approach allows them to determine
whether a stimulus or an event actually causes something
to happen. In an experimental approach, researchers randomly assign participants to different conditions. These
conditions should be identical except for one variable
that the researcher is interested in. For example, psychologists have asked whether people learn more if they
study for one long period or several short periods. To
study this experimentally, the psychologist would assign

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The researcher would make sure that all the participants studied the same material, for the same total time,
and were in the same study environment; the only thing
that would differentiate the two groups is whether the
learners studied for short or long segments. Thus, any difference in the amount of learning should be due only to
the length of the study periods. (This kind of research has
revealed that people learn better with several shorter
study periods.) The experimental approach is useful when
the research can establish control over the environment;
this work is often done in a simple laboratory setting.
A second approach involves the correlational technique. This approach does not include control of the environment by the researcher. Instead, measurements are
made as they naturally occur. For example, a group of
high school students took two tests that required them to
solve analogies and to recognize antonyms. The researchers discovered a correlation between students’
abilities to complete analogies correctly and to identify
antonyms. In general, students who were good at one
task were also good at the other; students weak in one
task were weak in the other. In correlational research, no
attempt is made to state that one thing causes another,
only that one thing is predictable from the other.
Correlational approaches are most useful when the
researchers cannot control the environment or when the
phenomena they want to study are complex. Instead of
trying to simplify the situation, the researchers observe
the complex behaviors as they naturally occur. A third
approach is called naturalistic observation. This kind of
research often is not highly quantitative; that is, observations are likely to be descriptive. The researcher decides
on some class of behavior to observe and records the situations in which that behavior occurs and how it develops. A classic example of observational research was
done by Jane Goodall in her work with chimpanzees in
the wild. She spent years observing their social interactions and how the chimp “society” changed over time.
The previous techniques all involve observing a
group of individuals. Sometimes, psychologists are interested in studying a single person in depth. This is called
a case study. This approach is common when clinical
psychologists work with a person over a long period of
time. The final product in a case study is an in-depth description of a great number of different aspects of the individual’s life and development. The strength of this approach is that detail is abundant; the weakness is that the
psychologist cannot generalize to other people from the

single individual being analyzed because that person
may differ in important ways from the average person.
Finally, psychologists can use archival information
to answer questions. Archival research differs considerably from the other approaches because it does not rely
on direct observation or interaction with the people
being studied. Rather, psychologists use records or other
already existing information. For example, some psychologists were interested in whether the percentage of
left-handed people in the population has remained constant throughout history. They obviously could not observe people who have died, so they decided to use existing information about the past. They recorded the percentage of left-handed people in paintings and other such
renderings. After poring over paintings, they concluded
that the percentage of left-handed people has not
changed over the last few centuries. More commonly,
archival information comes from birth and death records
and other official statistics.
See also Correlational method; Scientific method
Further Reading
Cozby, Paul C. Methods in Behavioral Science. Mountain
View, CA: Mayfield Publishing Company, 1993.

Ribonucleic acid (RNA)
A complex organic substance involved in protein
synthesis in cells.

RNA consists of a five-carbon sugar (ribose),
phosphate, and four nitrogenous bases (adenine, guanine, cytosine, and uracil). In an RNA molecule, the
sugar and phosphate combine to form a structure to

Computer-generated image of ribonucleic acid. (Photo by
Ken Eward. National Audubon Society Collection/Photo
Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

547

Ribonucleic acid (RNA)

people into one of two groups—one group that studies
for an extended period of time or to another group that
studies for the same total amount of time, but in short
segments.

Right-brain hemisphere

which the nitrogenous bases are attached. These molecules range in composition from fewer than 100 to several thousand nitrogenous bases, and vary in shape
from helical to uncoiled. RNA is the primary agent of
protein formation, and processes genetic information
from deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules into
enzymes necessary for life.

by the other. Thus, right-handed people had no trouble
writing, which is usually governed by the left-brain
hemisphere in righthanders, but were unable to draw, as
the left brain was cut off from the spatial capacity of the
right. When a special apparatus was used to present the
image of a spoon only to a split-brain patient’s left
hemisphere, the subject could name it readily, but when
the same image was presented to the right-brain hemisphere, the subject could not, although they were still
aware of what it was.

Right-brain hemisphere

Research on both split-brain and normal subjects
since the 1960s has confirmed that both hemispheres of
the brain use high-level cognitive modes. That of the left
brain is verbal and analytic, while right brain thought
processes are rapid, complex, whole-pattern, spatial, and
specialized for visualimagery and musical ability. The
right temporal lobe, in particular, governs visual and auditory imagery. People in whom this area is damaged
have difficulty recognizing familiar melodies, faces, and
pictures, and learning to identify new ones. The right
brain hemisphere also appears to have special links to
emotion. Right-brain damage interferes with both the
ability to produce and interpret expressions of emotion.
Damage to the front part of the right-brain hemisphere
renders people unable to act on or express strong emotions. If the damage is further back in the brain, the person can express emotion but not recognize it in other
people or in pictures.

The hemisphere of the brain that neurologically
controls the left side of the body and is thought to
control spatial tasks, musical and artistic endeavors, body control and awareness, and creativity
and imagination.

In normal human adults, each hemisphere of the
brain, working in concert with the other, performs
certain types of functions more efficiently than the
other. While the left-brain hemisphere is dominant in
the areas of language and logic, the right-brain hemisphere is the center of nonverbal, intuitive, holistic
modes of thinking. Each hemisphere mostly receives
perceptions from and controls the activities of the opposite side of the body. Scientists have been aware of
the specialized functioning of the hemispheres—also
known as lateralization—for over one hundred years,
having discovered that language skills are controlled
by the left side of the brain in approximately 95 percent of right-handed people and about two thirds of
left-handed individuals. In the nineteenth century,
however, this discovery led to the assumption that all
higher reasoning ability resided in the left-brain
hemisphere, which was thus regarded as dominant
overall. The right brain hemisphere was thought to
possess only lower-level capabilities and was considered subordinate to the left.
Research conducted in the 1950s and 1960s established that the two hemispheres of a normally functioning brain—connected by the corpus callosum, a thick
cable of nerves—operate in a complementary fashion
with both hemispheres involved in higher cognitive
functioning. The primary difference between them was
found to involve the mode rather than the level of thinking. A research group under the direction of Roger Sperry at the California Institute of Technology observed
and tested patients who had undergone a surgical procedure in which the corpus callosumwas severed to control epileptic seizures. In this procedure, the two hemispheres of the brain, which normally have a strong tendency to work together, were uncoupled, and each side
of the brain remained ignorant of information received
548

Other general characteristics of right-brain thought
processes include the tendency to synthesize rather than
analyze, and to relate to things in a concrete rather than a
symbolic fashion. Where left-brain thinking tends to represent wholes by abstraction (using one piece of information to represent something larger), the right brain is
more likely to interpret data through analogies ó —seeing relationships between wholes. Right-brain functioning is nontemporal, nonrational, holistic, and intuitive,
relying on leaps of insight, hunches, or visual images.
Discoveries about the right- and left-brain hemispheres
have led some researchers and educators to advocate educational reforms that would allow right-brain modes of
thought a greater place in the current educational system,
which reflects society’s overall tendency to reward the
verbal, analytical left-brain skills. As split-brain researcher Roger Sperry notes, our educational system
“tends to neglect the nonverbal form of intellect. What it
comes down to is that modern society discriminates
against the right hemisphere.” The artistic, creative right
brain is relegated to the “minor” subjects of art and
music, but the main programs of study do not, as a rule,
focus on developing the right-brain skills of imagination, creativity, or visualization.
See also Brain; Handedness; Split-brain technique

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Carl Rogers

Carl Rogers
1902-1987
American psychologist who developed a nondirective, patient-centered method of psychotherapy
known as humanistic psychology.

Carl Rogers was born in Oak Park, Illinois. Raised in
a fundamentalist Christian home, Rogers attended the
University of Wisconsin and studied for the ministry at
Union Theological Seminary before deciding to pursue a
doctorate in education and clinical psychology at Columbia University. Between 1928 and 1939, Rogers worked
as a counselor at the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty
to Children in Rochester. In 1940, he was appointed to
the faculty of Ohio State University. By this time, he had
worked out much of his new client-centered system of
therapy, which was set forth in his second book, Counseling and Psychotherapy, published in 1942.
Rogers believed that the mental condition of virtually all patients, whom he referred to as clients, can be improved, given an appropriate psychotherapeutic environment. Central to this environment is a close personal relationship between client and therapist. Rogers’s use of
the term “client” rather than “patient” expresses his rejection of the traditionally authoritarian relationship between therapist and client, and his view of them as
equals. The client determines the general direction of
therapy, while the therapist seeks to increase the client’s
insightful self-understanding through informal clarifying
questions. A hallmark of Rogers’s method is the therapist echoing or reflecting the client’s remarks, which is
supposed to convey a sense of respect as well as a belief
in the patient’s ability to deal with his or her problems.
The concept of an alliance between client and therapist
has affinities with the methods of Carl Jung. Otto Rank
(1884-1939) was also an early influence on the development of Rogers’s system.
Rogerian therapy is a natural consequence of its creator’s belief that a fundamental element of human nature
is the drive to fully actualize one’s positive potential, a
concept based on an essentially positive view of humanity that contrasts with the psychoanalytic view of human
beings as driven by antisocial impulses that are suppressed with difficulty and often at great cost. In
Rogers’s view, the primary task of therapy is to remove
the client’s obstacles to self-actualization. A further
contrast to psychoanalysis lies in the fact that Rogerian
therapy emphasizes the current emotions and attitudes of
the client rather than early childhood experiences.
After leaving Ohio State in 1945, Rogers served on
the faculties of the University of Chicago and the Uni-

Carl Rogers (Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with permission.)

versity of Wisconsin. Between 1956 and 1947, he
served as president of the American Psychological Association. As Rogers gained increasing acclaim, the
popularity of his method grew rapidly. Rogerian therapy
was widely practiced in the 1950s and 1960s, when its
tenets of antiauthoritarianism and permissiveness gave it
a wide appeal to many. Rogers published Client-Centered Therapy: Its Current Practice, Implications, and
Theory in 1951 and produced numerous of papers in the
decade that followed. In 1956, the American Psychological Association awarded him its Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award. In the 1960s, Rogers was attracted to the human potential movement that had begun in
California, and he adopted some of its principles, including its emphasis on frank and open expression of
feelings and its use of group therapy. In 1964, he and
his wife moved to La Jolla, California, where he continued to write and lecture, and served as a resident fellow
at the Western Behavioral Science Institute. On Becoming a Person, published in 1961, became his most widely read book. In the last ten years of his life, Rogers became deeply interested in educational reform. Borrowing a central principle from his therapeutic method, he
came to believe that teachers (like therapists) should
serve as facilitators rather than judges or mere conveyors of facts.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

549

Role playing/psychodrama

Roger’s other books include Psychotherapy and
Personality Change (1954), Freedom to Learn: A View of
What Education Might Become (1969), Carl Rogers on
Encounter Groups (1970), Carl Rogers on Personal
Power (1977), and A Way of Being (1980).
See also Client-centered therapy

Rorschach technique

Further Reading
Thorne, Brian. Carl Rogers. London: Sage Publications, 1992.

Role playing/psychodrama
A group therapy approach in which clients act out
their problems to gain new insights and achieve
emotional catharsis.

Role playing was developed by Jacob Moreno, a Viennese psychologist who contended that people could
gain more from acting out their problems than from talking about them. This method requires a protagonist (the
client whose problems are being acted out); auxiliary
egos (group members who assume the roles of other people in the protagonist’s life); an audience (other group
members who observe and react to the drama); and a director (the therapist). The protagonist selects an event
from his or her life and provides the information necessary for it to be reenacted. Although every detail of the
event cannot be reproduced, the reenactment can be effective if it captures the essence of the original experience. The group members who serve as auxiliary egos
impersonate significant people from the protagonist’s
past or present, following the protagonist’s instructions
as closely as possible. Techniques used in the reenactment may include role reversal, doubling, mirror technique, future projection, and dream work.
The therapist, acting as facilitator and director, assists the protagonist in orchestrating the scene, offers
emotional support, enlists the audience’s response, and
helps the protagonist gain new insights from the experience. Immediately preceding the reenactment is a warmup period designed to prepare all the participants for the
experience by motivating them and establishing a safe
and trusting atmosphere. After the reenactment, members of the audience discuss their reactions to the reenactment, including ways that it touched on their own experiences. Encouragement and support is offered to the
protagonist, as well as suggestions for responding to the
problems dealt within the reenactment.
Role playing is sometimes employed in a combination of techniques in other types of therapy, such as
Gestalt therapy. The client may role play with the thera550

pist in an individual treatment session or with group
members in group therapy.

A projective personality assessment based on the
subject’s reactions to a series of ten inkblot pictures.

Popularly known as the “Inkblot” test, the Rorschach technique, or Rorschach Psychodiagnostic Test is
the most widely used projective psychological test. The
Rorschach is used to help assess personality structure
and identify emotional problems. Like other projective
techniques, it is based on the principle that subjects
viewing neutral, ambiguous stimuli will project their
own personalities onto them, thereby revealing a variety
of unconscious conflicts and motivations. Administered
to both adolescents and adults, the Rorschach can also be
used with children as young as three years old. The test
provides information about a person’s thought processes,
perceptions, motivations, and attitude toward his or her
environment, and it can detect internal and external
pressures and conflicts as well as illogical or psychotic
thought patterns.
The Rorschach technique is named for Swiss psychiatrist Hermann Rorschach (1884-1922), who developed it. Rorschach, whose primary interest was in Jungian analysis, began experimenting with inkblots as
early as 1911 as a means of determining introversion
and extroversion. The Rorschach technique is administered using 10 cards, each containing a complicated
inkblot pattern, five in color and five in black and white.
Subjects look at the cards one at a time and describe
what each inkblot resembles. After the subject has
viewed all 10 cards, the examiner usually goes back over
the responses for additional information. The subject
may be asked to clarify some responses or to describe
which features of each inkblot prompted the responses.
Test scores are based on several factors. One is location, or what part of the blot a person focuses on: the
whole blot (W), sections of it (D), or only specific details
(Dd). Another is whether the response is based on factors
such as form, color, movement, or shading (referred to as
determinants). For example, people who tend to see
movement in Rorschach blots are thought to be intellectual and introspective; those who see mostly stationary
objects or patterns are described as practical and actionoriented. Finally, content refers to which objects, persons, or situations the person sees in the blot (categories
include humans, animals, clothing, and nature). Most examiners also assess responses based on the frequency of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Rorschach technique

Example of a Rorschach ink blot test. (Stan Goldblatt. Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

certain responses as given by previous test takers. Many
psychologists interpret the test freely according to their
subjective impressions, including their impression of the
subject’s demeanor while taking the test (cooperative,
anxious, defensive, and so forth). Such interpretations,
especially when combined with clinical observation and
knowledge of a client’s personal history, can help a therapist arrive at a more expansive, in-depth understanding
of the client’s personality.
While the Rorschach technique is still widely used,
its popularity has decreased somewhat in recent decades.
Unlike objective personality inventories, which can be
administered to a group, the Rorschach test must be
given individually. A skilled examiner is required, and
the test can take several hours to complete and interpret.
Like other projective tests, it has been criticized for lack
of validity and reliability. Interpretation of responses is
highly dependent on an examiner’s individual judgment:
two different testers may interpret the same responses
quite differently. In addition, treatment procedures at
mental health facilities often require more specific, objective types of personality description than those provided by the Rorschach technique.

Rorschach, who pioneered the test in 1921, did not
provide a comprehensive scoring system. In response to
complaints about validity, scoring methods have been devised which aim at providing greater objectivity by clearly specifying certain personality variables and relating
them to clinical diagnoses. The Exner Comprehensive
Rorschach System, released in 1987, is a computer-based
scoring system that provides score summaries and lists
likely personality and adjustment descriptions for each
test taker. To overcome limitations in the Rorschach,
Wayne Holtzman and his colleagues developed the Holtzman Inkblot Test that uses 45 inkblots, scores for 22 characteristics and allows for only one response per card.
The Rorschach is generally used as part of a battery of
tests and must be administered by a trained psychologist.
See also Personality inventory
Further Reading
Aronow, Edward. The Rorschach Technique: Perceptual Basics, Content Interpretation, and Applications. Needham
Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon, 1994.
Lerner, Paul M. Psychoanalytic Theory and the Rorschach.
Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press, 1991.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

551

Rosen picture frustration study

Rosenzweig picture
frustration study
A projective test administered to assess personality
characteristics, in which the subject is shown
scenes depicting moderately frustrating situations
and asked what the frustrated person depicted
would probably do, or how the subject would
react in such situations.

The Rosenzweig Picture Frustration test consists of
24 cartoon pictures, each portraying two persons in a
frustrating situation. Each picture contains two “speech
balloons,” a filled one for the “frustrator” or antagonist,
and a blank one for the frustrated person, or protagonist.
The subject is asked to fill in the blank balloon with his
or her response to the situation, and the responses are
scored in relation to a number of psychological defense
mechanisms. For example, responses are scored as to
whether, and to what degree, they indicate that the subject exhibits aggression toward the source of the frustration, assumes blame or guilt as the cause of the frustration, or justifies, minimizes, or denies the frustration.
The score is based on a total of nine factors, derived
from combinations of three types of aggression (obstacle-dominance, ego-defense, and need-persistence) and
three directions of aggression (extraggression, imaggression, and intraggression). However, testers often analyze
the subject’s responses more informally and intuitively.
Originally developed for adults by Saul Rosenzweig, the test is now available in versions for children
and adolescents. The empirical validity of the Rosenzweig Picture Frustration Study and other projective
techniques is disputed by some authorities.
Further Reading
Rosenzweig, Saul. The Rosenzweig Picture Frustration (P-F)
Study. St. Louis: Rana House, 1978.

Julian B. Rotter
1916American psychologist best known for his social
learning theory of personality.

Julian B. Rotter was born in Brooklyn, New York. His
parents were Jewish immigrants, and he was their third
son. His father operated a profitable business until it ran
into trouble during the Great Depression. The economic
downturn greatly affected Rotter and his family, and
made him realize how strongly people are affected by
their environments. In high school, Rotter’s interest in
552

psychology began when he read books by eminent psychotherapists Alfred Adler and Sigmund Freud. He attended Brooklyn College, where he received a bachelor of
arts degree in chemistry in 1937. While in college he started going to seminars given by Adler as well as attending
meetings of Adler’s Society of Individual Psychology.
After graduating, Rotter entered the State University
of Iowa. He minored in speech pathology and studied
with Wendell Johnson, a linguist whose work focused on
meanings in language. Johnson’s ideas had a great influence on Rotter in terms of his coming to believe that language should be used very carefully in psychology in
terms of how one defines terms and theoretical constructs. One of Rotter’s instructors in Iowa was Kurt
Lewin, the Prussian-born psychologist known primarily
for field theory. Rotter received his master of arts in psychology degree in 1938. Rotter then did a one-year internship in clinical psychology at Worcester State Hospital in Massachusetts. At that time there were very few
internships in clinical psychology available. He met his
wife to be, Clara Barnes, at the hospital and they married
in 1941. They would have two children.
In 1939, Rotter enrolled in Indiana University’s doctoral program in clinical psychology, one of the few
schools offering such a program at that time. He received
his doctorate in 1941. In doing a predoctoral internship
before receiving his Ph.D. in clinical psychology, he was
one of the first clinical psychologists to be trained in
what is now the standard model. During World War II
Rotter entered the United States Army and served as a
personnel consultant in the armored force before becoming an aviation psychologist in the Air Force. In 1946 he
joined the faculty of Ohio State University and served as
director for its clinical psychology training program
from 1951 to 1959, and in 1962 to 1963.
Rotter was very active in setting up standards for the
training of clinical psychologists. In 1949, Rotter participated in what became known as the Boulder Conference
where training requirements were developed for clinical
psychologists at the doctoral level. He argued that psychologists should not be trained as psychiatrists (medical
doctors who, after receiving their primary training in
medicine, then focus on the psychological). Rotter felt
clinical psychologists should be trained in academic departments of psychology as scientists and therapists (the
scientist-practitioner model), being steeped in the study
of general psychology throughout their training.
While at Ohio State, Rotter began work on his social learning theory of personality and in 1954 Social
Learning and Clinical Psychology was published. In this
book he laid out the basic tenets of his social learning
theory, the main idea of which is that personality is real-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In 1966, Rotter published a monograph entitled Generalized Expectancies for Interval Versus External Control of Reinforcement, where he explored people’s expectancies as to whether they can influence the reinforcements they receive. At one extreme are people who believe that reinforcements are due to fate or luck. They
would be said to have an external locus of control. At the
other extreme are those who believe that reinforcements
are a function of one’s behavior. They have an internal
locus of control. Rotter also created the Internal-External
Locus of Control Scale to measure individual differences
in this characteristic. The scale has been widely used, and
research on I-E flourished in the 1970s. This dimension
of internal versus external locus of control has come to be
seen as a relatively stable dimension of personality.
Rotter has served as president of the divisions of
Clinical Psychology and Social and Personality Psychology of the American Psychological Association. In 1963,
Rotter left Ohio State to become director of the Clinical
Psychology Training Program at the University of Connecticut. He retired in 1987 and is currently Professor
Emeritus of Clinical Psychology. In 1989, Rotter received the American Psychological Association’s Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award. His wife passed
away in 1985.
Marie Doorey
Further Reading
Rotter, Julian B. Social learning and clinical psychology. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1954.

Rotter, Julian B. “Generalized expectancies for interval versus
external control of reinforcement.” Psychological Monographs, 80, (1966): 1-28.
Rotter, Julian B. The development and applications of social
learning theory: Selected papers. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1982.
Hock, R.R. Forty studies that changed psychology. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1995.

Further Information
Department of Psychology, U-20 University of Connecticut.
406 Babbidge Road, Storrs, CT, USA. 06269-1020.

Benjamin Rush
1746-1813
American physician, teacher, and statesman known
as the “father of American psychiatry” for his work
with the mentally ill.

Benjamin Rush was born near Philadelphia. He attended the College of New Jersey (the future Princeton
University), intending to enter the ministry. Finally deciding in favor of medicine, Rush began his medical
studies in Philadelphia, serving a six-year apprenticeship
to a local physician. He then enrolled in the University of
Edinburgh, Scotland, where many American physicians
received their training at the time. Rush earned his M.D.
degree in 1768, having concentrated in the study of
chemistry. Returning to America, he began his own private practice the following year, when he was also appointed to a teaching position at the College of Philadelphia, becoming the first professor of chemistry in North
America and authoring the first chemistry text by an
American (Syllabus of a Course of Lectures on Chemistry). Rush’s medical practice grew rapidly. He was
known in particular for his strong endorsement of the
contemporary practice of treating fevers by bloodletting
and purges, as a result of his conviction that fevers resulted from arterial tension which could only be relieved
by bloodletting. In severe cases, he recommended that as
much as four-fifths of the patient’s blood be drained.
Rush played a prominent role in the American Revolution. In 1776, he served as a member of the Continental Congress, and was also a signer of the Declaration of
Independence. He also served from 1776 to 1778 as
Physician General of the Continental Army. Rush was an
enthusiastic supporter of the U.S. Constitution and a
member of the Pennsylvania Convention that ratified it.
In 1787, Rush took charge of the treatment of mental
patients at the Pennsylvania Hospital, beginning the work
that eventually earned him the title “father of American
psychiatry.” While his treatment methods—which includ-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

553

Benjamin Rush

ly the interaction between a person and his or her environment. Personality does not reside within an individual independent of the environment he or she is in. By
the same token, an individual’s behaviors are not simple,
reflexive responses to an objective environment. Rather,
the environment an individual responds to or acts in is
dependent on that particular individual’s learning experiences and life history. What stimuli people respond to
are shaped by their experiences. Two people might experience the same environment in very different ways. For
example, Joe might respond to a visit to the doctor with
apprehension because his last visit involved getting a
painful shot, whereas Sam would not be apprehensive at
all because his last visit was pleasant and did not involve
any discomfort. To Rotter, personality is a relatively
fixed group of dispositions to react to situations in a certain manner. He stressed that most learning takes place
in social situations with other people. Rotter’s personality theory was the first to comprehensively integrate cognition, in the form of expectancy, with learning and motivation, in the form of reinforcement.

Benjamin Rush

onment, Rush helped bring mental health under the domain of medicine. He also authored the first psychiatry
book written by an American, Medical Inquiries and Observations upon the Diseases of the Mind, in 1812.
In addition to his contributions to medicine and politics, Rush worked on behalf of many social issues of his
day, including the establishment of public schools, education for women, prison reform, and the abolition of slavery and capital punishment. He was in the forefront of
the struggle against Philadelphia’s yellow-fever epidemics
of the 1790s. Although he did note the apparent connection between the disease and the presence of mosquitoes,
he continued to advocate bloodletting as the primary
method of treatment, unfortunately influencing several
generations of physicians who treated similar epidemics
in the nineteenth century. (He fell ill when he used his
treatment method on himself in 1793.) Rush’s name is
also linked with physicians’ rights in relation to freedom
of the press. Attacked in the newspapers for his controversial medical and political views, he sued his detractors and
was awarded damages by a Pennsylvania court.

Benjamin Rush (Reproduced with permission.)

ed bloodletting, purging, intimidation, hot and cold baths,
and chair restraints—can hardly be considered clinical
advances, Rush’s view of mental disease represented a
major advance in the understanding of that subject. He
believed that insanity often has a physical cause, and that
mental illnesses, like physical illnesses, may be as treatable. Through his insistence that insanity was a disease
requiring treatment rather than a crime calling for impris-

554

In 1789, Rush gave up his chemistry professorship
at the University of Pennsylvania in order to begin teaching medicine, which he continued to do for the remainder of his career, serving as a mentor to a generation of
medical students. In 1797, he was appointed to the position of treasurer at the United States Mint and held that
office until his death in 1813. Rush’s other books include
Medical Inquiries and Observations (1794-98) and Essays: Literary, Moral and Philosophical (1798).
Further Reading
Binger, Carl A. Revolutionary Doctor: Benjamin Rush. New
York: Norton, 1966.
Weisberger, Bernard A. “The Paradoxical Doctor Benjamin
Rush.” American Heritage 27 (1975): 40-47, 98-99.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

S
Satanic ritual abuse
Activities such as cannibalism, animal sacrifice,
and child sexual abuse that are assumed to be carried out by organized underground cults.

In 1984, Newsweek printed a feature article on an
“epidemic” of child abuse in day-care settings. During
the next 10 years or so, numerous newspaper and magazine articles described criminal trials in which reference
was made to sexual abuse, torture, and ritual worship of
one kind or another. For example, in 1988 Kelly
Michaels was charged with sexually abusing children in
her care at a nursery school in New Jersey. On the basis
of children’s testimony, she was convicted of 115 counts
of sexual abuse against 20 different children. In Manhattan Beach, California, seven teachers were accused of
abusing hundreds of preschool children over a 10-year
period. The case was one of the longest and most expensive trials in California history. There have been numerous cases like these in the U.S., Canada, and the U.K. All
have involved accusations by children that they had been
terrorized, abused, and tortured during strange ceremonies with satanic, ritualistic overtones. Some professional child care workers assumed that the accused perpetrators were members of an organized network of
child predators.
What evidence is there to support the belief in an organization of child abusers? One study in Great Britain
investigated 84 cases of reported ritualistic abuse involving sexual abuse, murder, bestiality, and torture. In only
3 of the 84 cases was there any material evidence to support the allegations, and none of them entailed witchcraft
or Satanism. In the United States, a nationwide study
identified more than 12,000 accusations of cult-like, satanic, ritual abuse. None of the allegations were substantiated, and neither the police nor the FBI have ever uncovered any evidence of child-abusing satanic cults. In
the McMartin Preschool case, none of the accused teachers was ever convicted of a crime. Kelly Michaels was

released from jail when the Appeals Court of New Jersey
reversed her conviction.
There is no dispute that children are often abused,
and that the consequences can be devastating. Raising
questions about the (assumed) existence of organized,
satanic, child-abusing cults is not the same as doubting
the existence of actual child abuse, nor to question its
wrongfulness. If organized ritualistic abuse does not
occur, then how can we explain the widespread belief in
it? Contributing factors include adults who have been
persuaded by their therapists that they were abused as
children, children who have been interviewed in aggressive and manipulative ways by investigators who believe
the worst, and uncritical and sensationalized media accounts of satanic sexual abuse.
Timothy Moore
Further Reading
Bottoms, B.L., and S.L. Davis. “The Creation of Satanic Ritual
Abuse.” Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 16
(1997): 112-32.
Nathan, D., and M. Snedeker. Satan’s Silence: Ritual Abuse
and the Making of a Modern American Witch Hunt. New
York: Basic Books, 1995.

Virginia M. Satir
1916-1988
American family therapist who championed the
worth of the individual person.

Although Virginia Satir devoted her career to family
therapy, she believed strongly in focusing on the selfworth of individuals. The family unit might be critically
important, she felt, but the self-esteem of each member
of the family had to come from within each person. Because of her studies, her experience based on working

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

555

Savant syndrome

with thousands of families, and her instinctive understanding of family issues, she earned a reputation as a pioneer and leader in the field of family therapy.
The oldest of five children, Satir was born on a
farm in Nellsville, Wisconsin, on June 26, 1916, to
Oscar and Minnie Happe Pagenkopf. She displayed
what would be a lifelong desire for knowledge at an
early age; she was reading by the age of three, and
through her childhood she read voraciously, often saying that she would like to be a detective and unravel
mysteries when she grew up. As one of five children
whose parents had large families (her parents came from
families of 13 and seven children), she was able to observe the family dynamic long before she had thought of
becoming a therapist.
Satir received her early education in a one-room
school, but by the time she was of high school age the
family had moved to Milwaukee. She excelled in high
school and upon graduation enrolled in Milwaukee State
Teachers College (now part of the University of Wisconsin). She worked her way through school and graduated
in 1936 with a bachelor of arts degree in education.

Embarks on social work career
For the first few years after she graduated, Satir was
a schoolteacher. Because she felt she would learn more
about people by being exposed to a variety of individuals
and communities, she traveled to different cities to teach,
including Ann Arbor, Michigan; Shreveport, Louisiana;
St. Louis, Missouri; and Miami, Florida. She then decided to pursue a career in social work; in 1937 she enrolled
at Northwestern University in Chicago, taking classes in
the summer and teaching school the rest of the year.
After three summers, she enrolled full time at the University of Chicago, completing her coursework by 1943
and her thesis in 1948.
Being a graduate student was a difficult but ultimately rewarding experience for Satir. During the 1940s,
there was still a stigma against women in graduate programs, even in an ostensibly more liberal discipline such
as social work. Satire later said that these experiences
made her stronger and more determined to keep going.

Begins family therapy training programs
After receiving her master’s degree, Satir went into
private practice. She met with an entire family instead of
an individual for the first time in 1951, and it convinced
her that therapy that included the family was more effective than working with the individual alone. She lived
out her lifelong dream of unraveling the mysteries of
family dynamics. Through the 1950s, she continued to
556

focus on working with families. After her second marriage (she had previously married Gordon Rodgers) to
Norman Satir ended in 1957, she moved to California,
and with two other therapists founded the Mental Health
Research Institute (MHRI). In 1962, MHRI obtained a
grant from the National Institute of Mental Health to
begin what would be the first formal family therapy
training program. Satir published her first book, Conjoint Family Therapy, in 1964. She traveled extensively
throughout the 1960s and 1970s, conducting workshops
and seminars.
Recognizing the importance of networking for
therapists, Satir founded the International Human Resources Learning Network (IHRLN) in 1970 and the
Avanta Network (now known as Avanta, the Virginia
Satir Network) in 1977. During these years, she received recognition for her important work. She received
a Distinguished Service Award from the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy, and the
University of Wisconsin awarded her an honorary doctorate in 1973.
Satir continued her work into the 1980s. She established the Satir Family Camps program through Avanta,
which allows families and their therapists to spend one
or two weeks in selected wilderness settings. She continued to travel and conduct training programs and seminars. In the summer of 1988, she was diagnosed with
pancreatic cancer. She stayed active through the summer
but the cancer spread, and she died at her home in Menlo
Park, California, on September 10, 1988.
George A. Milite
Further Reading
Satir, Virginia. Conjoint Family Therapy: A Guide to Theory
and Techniques. Palo Alto, CA: Science and Behavior
Books, 1964.
Satir, Virginia. Peoplemaking. Palo Alto, CA: Science and Behavior Books, 1972.

Savant syndrome
A condition characterized by a combination of
below normal intelligence and extraordinary mental abilities in one or a few narrow areas.

Persons who display savant syndrome have traditionally been called idiot savants, a term that many
currently avoid because of its negative connotations.
Alternate terms include retarded savant and autistic savant, the latter referring to the fact that savant syn-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Savant skills occur in a number of different areas.
Savants with musical abilities demonstrate an excellent
ear for music from an early age, often including perfect pitch. They are able to reproduce melodies and
even entire compositions with great accuracy and often
show considerable performing talent, including both
technical and interpretive skills. Others show unusual
talent in the visual arts, which may include the ability
to produce life-like reproductions at a very young age,
when most children can turn out only primitive drawings. Some savants demonstrate a computer-like ability
to perform difficult mathematical calculations at lightning speeds.
Perhaps the most common area where savants
show extraordinary abilities is memory. They may
memorize historical data, sports statistics, population
figures, biographical information, or even telephone
directories. One savant with uncommon musical abilities could also provide biographical information about
the composer of almost any piece of music, as well as
stating the key and opus of the piece. She could describe in detail every musical performance she had
heard within a 20-year period and provide biographical
information about every member of the local symphony orchestra. One particular type of memorization
common to a large proportion of savants is calendar
calculating, the ability to say what day of the week a
particular date will fall (or has already fallen) on.
Some savants can provide this type of information for
periods covering hundreds of years.
Savants have been studied by researchers investigating such topics as the nature of human intelligence and
the relative influence of heredity and environment.
Further Reading
Howe, Michael J. A. Fragments of Genius: The Strange Feats
of Idiots Savants. London: Routledge, 1989.
Obler, L.K., and D. Fein, eds. The Exceptional Brain: Neuropsychology of Talent and Special Abilities. New York:
Guilford Press, 1988.
Treffert, D.A. Extraordinary People. New York: Harper and
Row, 1989.

Further Information
Autism Society of America (formerly National Society for
Autistic Children). 8601 Georgia Ave., Suite 503, Silver
Spring, MD 20910, (301) 565–0433.

Scapegoating
A powerful and destructive phenomenon wherein
a person or group of people are blamed for whatever is wrong.

In ancient times, there were rituals of scapegoating. A
tribe or person would literally sacrifice an animal to the
gods, or send an animal into the desert declaring that that animal was carrying away the tribe’s sins. In today’s culture,
psychology uses the term to discuss certain forms of victimization. A particular child of an alcoholic family can be
deemed the scapegoat, for instance, and may be the object of
a parent’s abuse and the reason for seeking professional
help. The child is “innocent,” but receives the blame for the
problems in the household. Historically, entire groups of
people have been scapegoated. In Nazi Germany, Hitler and
his army scapegoated the Jewish people. The Nazis declared
the Jews to be the reason for their societal ills and further believed that if they eliminated the Jewish people, then their
problems would be solved. Currently in America, there is
scapegoating of lesbian and gay people. Some heterosexuals, often with strong religious ties, blame lesbian and gay
people for the moral decay in America.
Why scapegoating occurs is rather complex. Scapegoating serves the need of the dominant social group to
feel better about themselves. It relieves the group’s responsibility for their own problems. The scapegoated
person or group becomes the focus and the reason for the
difficult life condition. It was easier for Hitler to blame
the problems of German society on the Jews than it
would have been for him to truly understand the complex
socio-political changes that were happening at the time.
Scapegoating also allows people to feel united when they
join together to blame someone else. And when action is
taken against the scapegoat, the dominant group can feel
that they have accomplished something.
Scapegoating begins with devaluation, or putting
someone else down. Then the scapegoated person or
group is blamed as the cause of a problem. Once a victim
has been blamed, they are then dehumanized so that it is
easier to treat them with less compassion. For instance,
in some circles, people with HIV/AIDS are often spoken
of only as statistics, not as real people who need compassion and care.
In many scapegoating situations, the anger and aggression of the dominant person or group is displaced, or
projected, onto the victim. Really the frustration lies
within the person doing the scapegoating. Scapegoating
never truly solves any problems, it merely deflects attention away from the person or group who most needs help.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Lara Lynn Lane
557

Scapegoating

drome is often associated with autism. It is difficult to
arrive at an exact figure for the incidence of savant
syndrome. A 1977 study found the incidence among
the institutionalized mentally handicapped in the United States to be 0.06 percent of the population, or one
in roughly 2,000. Most savants are males.

Schizophrenia

Causes of schizophrenia

Further Reading
Allport, G.W. The Nature of Prejudice. Reading, MA: Addison
Wesley, 1995.
Gilmore, Norbert, and Margaret A. Somerville. “Stigmatization, Scapegoating, and Discrimination in Sexually Transmitted Diseases: Overcoming ‘Them’ and ‘Us’.” Social
Science and Medicine vol. 39, no. 9 (November 1994):
1339-358.
Hafsi, Mohamed. “Experimental Inquiry into the Psychodynamics of the Relationship between the Group’s Dominant Basic Assumption Type and Scapegoating Phenomenon.” Psychologica: An International Journal of Psychology in the Orient vol. 41, no. 4 (December 1998): 272-84.
Staub, Ervin. “Cultural-Societal Roots of Violence: The Examples of Genocidal Violence and of Contemporary Youth
Violence in the U.S.” American Psychologist vol. 51, no.
2 (February 1996): 117-32.

Further Information
The Scapegoat Society. Hindleap Corner, Priory Road, Forest
Row, East Sussex, England RH18 5JF. http://www.scapegoat.demon.co.uk/.

Schizophrenia
A mental illness characterized by disordered thinking, delusions, hallucinations, emotional disturbance, and withdrawal from reality.

Some experts view schizophrenia as a group of related illnesses with similar characteristics. The condition
affects between one-half and one percent of the world’s
population, occurring with equal frequency in males and
females (although the onset of symptoms is usually earlier in males). Between 1 and 2% of Americans are
thought to be afflicted with schizophrenia—at least 2.5
million at any given time, with an estimated 100,000 to
200,000 new cases every year. Although the name
“schizophrenia,” coined in 1911 by Swiss psychologist
Eugene Bleuler (1857-1939), is associated with the idea
of a “split” mind, the disorder is different from a “split
personality” (dissociative identity disorder), with
which it is frequently confused. Schizophrenia is commonly thought to disproportionately affect people in the
lowest socioeconomic groups, although some claim that
socially disadvantaged persons with schizophrenia are
only more visible than their more privileged counterparts, not more numerous. In the United States, schizophrenics occupy more hospital beds than patients suffering from cancer, heart disease, or diabetes. At any given
time, they account for up to half the beds in long-term
care facilities. With the aid of antipsychotic medication
to control delusions and hallucinations, about 70% of
schizophrenics are able to function adequately in society.
558

While the exact cause of schizophrenia is not
known, it is believed to be caused by a combination of
physiological and environmental factors. Studies have
shown that there is clearly a hereditary component to the
disorder. Family members of schizophrenics are ten
times more prone to schizophrenia than the general population, and identical twins of schizophrenics have a
46% likelihood of having the illness themselves. Relatives of schizophrenics also tend to have milder psychological disorders with some of the same symptoms as
schizophrenia, such as suspicion, communication problems, and eccentric behavior.
In the years following World War II, many doctors
blamed schizophrenia on bad parenting. In recent years,
however, advanced neurological research has strengthened
the case for a physiological basis for the disease. It has
been discovered that the brains of schizophrenics have certain features in common, including smaller volume, reduced blood flow to certain areas, and enlargement of the
ventricles (cavities filled with fluid that are found at the
brain’s center). Over the past decade much attention has
focused on the connection between schizophrenia and neurotransmitters, the chemicals that transmit nerve impulses
within the brain. One such chemical—dopamine—has
been found to play an especially important role in the disease. Additional research has concentrated on how and
when the brain abnormalities that characterize the disorder
develop. Some are believed to originate prenatally for a variety of reasons, including trauma, viral infections, malnutrition during pregnancy, or a difference in Rh blood factor
between the fetus and the mother. Environmental factors
associated with schizophrenia include birth complications,
viral infections during infancy, and head injuries in childhood. While the notion of child rearing practices causing
schizophrenia has been largely discredited, there is evidence that certain family dynamics do contribute to the
likelihood of relapse in persons who already have shown
symptoms of the disease.

Types of schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is generally divided into four types.
The most prevalent, found in some 40% of affected persons, is paranoid schizophrenia, characterized by delusions and hallucinations centering on persecution, and by
feelings of jealousy and grandiosity. Other possible
symptoms include argumentativeness, anger, and violence. Catatonic schizophrenia is known primarily for its
catatonic state, in which persons retain fixed and sometimes bizarre positions for extended periods of time
without moving or speaking. However, catatonic schizophrenics may also experience periods of restless move-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The initial symptoms of schizophrenia usually occur
between the ages of 16 and 30, with some variation depending on the type. (The average age of hospital admission for the disease is between 28 and 34.) Disorganized
schizophrenia tends to begin early, usually in adolescence or young adulthood, while paranoid schizophrenia
tends to start later, usually after the age of 25 or 30. The
onset of acute symptoms is referred to as the first psychotic break, or break from reality. In general, the earlier
the onset of symptoms, the more severe the illness will
be. Before the disease becomes full-blown, schizophrenics may go through a period called the prodromal stage,
lasting about a year, when they experience behavioral
changes that precede and are less dramatic than those of
the acute stage. These may include social withdrawal,
trouble concentrating or sleeping, neglect of personal
grooming and hygiene, and eccentric behavior.
The prodromal stage is followed by the acute phase
of the disease, which is characterized by “positive”
symptoms and requires medical intervention. During this
stage, three-fourths of schizophrenics experience delusions—illogical and bizarre beliefs that are held despite
objections. A typical delusion might be a belief that the
afflicted person is under the control of a sinister force located in the sewer system that dictates his every move
and thought. Hallucinations are another common symptom of acute schizophrenia. These may be auditory
(hearing voices) or tactile (feeling as though worms are
crawling over one’s skin). The acute phase of schizophrenia is also characterized by incoherent thinking,
rambling or discontinuous speech, use of nonsense
words, and odd physical behavior, including grimacing,
pacing, and unusual postures. Persons in the grip of
acute schizophrenia may also become violent, although
often this violence is directed at themselves—it is estimated that 15-20% of schizophrenics commit suicide out
of despair over their condition or because the voices they
hear “tell” them to do so, and up to 35% attempt to take
their own lives or seriously consider doing so. In addi-

tion, between 25 and 50% of people with schizophrenia
abuse drugs or alcohol. As the positive symptoms of the
acute phase subside, they may give way to the negative
symptoms of what is called residual schizophrenia.
These include flat or inappropriate emotions, an inability
to experience pleasure (anhedonia), lack of motivation;
reduced attention span, lack of interest in one’s surroundings, and social withdrawal.
Researchers have found correlations between childhood behavior and the onset of schizophrenia in adulthood. A 30-year longitudinal research project studied
over 4,000 people born within a single week in 1946 in
order to document any unusual developmental patterns
observed in those children who later became schizophrenic. It was found that a disproportionate number of
them learned to sit, stand, and walk late. They were also
twice as likely as their peers to have speech disorders at
the age of six and to have played alone when they were
young. Home movies have enabled other researchers to
collect information about the childhood characteristics
of adult schizophrenics. One study found that the routine
physical movements of these children tended to be
slightly abnormal in ways that most parents wouldn’t
suspect were associated with a major mental illness and
that the children also tended to show fear and anger to
an unusual degree.

Treatment
Schizophrenia has historically been very difficult to
treat, usually requiring hospitalization during its acute
stage. In recent decades, antipsychotic drugs have become the most important component of treatment. They
can control delusions and hallucinations, improve
thought coherence, and, if taken on a long-term maintenance basis, prevent relapses. However, antipsychotic
drugs do not work for all schizophrenics, and their use
has been complicated by side effects, such as akathisia
(motor restlessness), dystonia (rigidity of the neck muscles), and tardive dyskinesia (uncontrollable repeated
movements of the tongue and the muscles of the face and
neck). In addition, many schizophrenics resist taking
medication, some because of the side effects, others because they may feel better and mistakenly decide they
don’t need the drugs anymore, or because being dependent on medication to function makes them feel bad
about themselves. The tendency of schizophrenics to discontinue medication is very harmful. Each time a schizophrenic goes off medication, the symptoms of the disease return with greater severity, and the effectiveness of
the drugs is reduced.
Until recently, the drugs most often prescribed for
schizophrenia have been neuroleptics such as Haldol,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

559

Schizophrenia

ment. In disorganized, or hebephrenic, schizophrenia,
the patient is incoherent, with flat or inappropriate emotions, disorganized behavior, and bizarre, stereotyped
movements and grimaces. Catatonic and disorganized
schizophrenia affect far fewer people than paranoid
schizophrenia. Most schizophrenics not diagnosed as
paranoid schizophrenics fall into the large category of
undifferentiated schizophrenia (the fourth type), which
consists of variations of the disorder that do not correspond to the criteria of the other three types. Generally,
symptoms of any type of schizophrenia must be present
for at least six months before a diagnosis can be made.
Over the long term, about one-third of patients experience recovery or remission.

Scholastic Assessment Test

Prolixin, Thorazine, and Mellaril. A major breakthrough
in the treatment of schizophrenia occurred in 1990 with
the introduction of the drug clozapine to the U.S. market.
Clozapine, which affects the neurotransmitters in the
brain (specifically serotonin and dopamine), has been
dramatically successful in relieving both positive and
negative symptoms of schizophrenia, especially in patients in whom other medications have not been effective. However, even clozapine doesn’t work for all patients. In addition, about 1% of those who take it develop
agranulocytosis, a potentially fatal blood disease, within
the first year of use, and all patients on clozapine must
be monitored regularly for this side effect. (Clozapine
was first developed decades ago but could not be introduced until it became possible to screen for this disorder.) The screening itself is expensive, creating another
problem for those using the drug. Risperidone, a new,
safer medication that offers benefits similar to those of
clozapine, was introduced in 1994 and is now the most
frequently prescribed antipsychotic medication in the
United States. Olanzapine, another in the new generation
of schizophrenia drugs, received FDA approval in the
fall of 1996, and more medications are under development. Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT, also called electric shock treatments) has been utilized to relieve symptoms of catatonia and depression in schizophrenics, especially in cases where medication is not effective.
Although medication is the most important part of
treatment, psychotherapy can also play an important
role in helping schizophrenics manage anxiety and deal
with interpersonal relationships, and treatment for the
disorder usually consists of a combination of medication,
therapy, and various types of rehabilitation. Family
therapy has worked well for many patients, educating
both patients and their families about the nature of schizophrenia and helping them in their cooperative effort to
cope with the disorder.
Further Reading
Atkinson, Jacqueline M. Schizophrenia: A Guide to What It Is
and What Can Be Done to Help. San Bernardino, CA: R.
Reginald Borgo Press, 1989.
Hoffer, Abram, and Humphry Osmond. How to Live with
Schizophrenia. New York: Carol Publishing Group, 1992.
Lidz, Theodore. The Origin and Treatment of Schizophrenic
Disorders. International Universities Press, 1990.
Walsh, Maryellen. Schizophrenia: Straight Talk for Families
and Friends. New York: William Morrow, 1985.

Further Information
American Schizophrenia Association. 900 North Federal Highway, Suite 330, Boca Raton, FL 33432, (407) 393–6167.
National Alliance for Research on Schizophrenia and Depression. 60 Cutter Mill Rd., Suite 200, Great Neck, NY
11202, (516) 829–0091.
560

Schizophrenics Anonymous. 1209 California Rd., Eastchester,
NY 10709, (914) 337–2252.

Scholastic Assessment Test
A test that measures verbal and mathematical abilities and achievement in specific subject areas.

In March 1994, the test formerly known as the
Scholastic Aptitude Test became the Scholastic Assessment Test (SAT). The name change reflects the test’s objectives more accurately, that is, to measure a student’s
scholastic ability and achievement rather than his or her
aptitude. The format of the SAT remains basically the
same, however; it is a series of tests, given to groups of
students. The tests measure verbal and mathematical
abilities and achievement in a variety of subject areas. It
is offered on Saturday mornings seven months of the
year at locations across the United States. Over 2,000
colleges and universities use the test scores as part of the
college admissions process. The SAT scores provide an
indicator of the student’s ability to do college-level
work. Intended as an objective standard for comparing
the abilities of students from widely different cultural
backgrounds and types of schools, the test can also help
students, their parents, and guidance counselors make
decisions in the college application process.
The two major components of the test are SAT I:
Reasoning Test, and SAT II: Subject Tests (formerly
called Achievement Tests). All SAT test-takers complete SAT I, a three-hour multiple-choice test. The Test
of Standard Written English, which prior to 1994 comprised a half-hour section of SAT I, has been eliminated.
The new SAT I has three verbal reasoning and three
mathematical reasoning sections. However, not all of
these are half-hour sections. For both the verbal and
mathematical components, two sections take 30 minutes, and the third takes only 15. This brings the total
test time to 2.5 hours. The remaining half hour is devoted to an experimental section called Equating, which
can be either a math or a verbal section. This section is
not counted in the student’s score, but the test-taker
does not know which one is the Equating section while
taking the test.
The Verbal Reasoning sections in the SAT I no longer
contains antonym questions, and a greater emphasis has
been placed on reading comprehension (called Critical
Reading), which, in some cases, requires the student to answer questions on two different text passages instead of
just one. As before, the Verbal Reasoning sections also include sentence completion and analogy questions.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

SAT II includes a variety of tests in subjects such as
English, foreign languages, math, history and social studies, psychology, and the sciences. SAT I and II cannot be
taken on the same day. Raw SAT scores are calculated
based on the number of correct answers minus a fraction
of a point for each wrong answer. Subtracting points for
wrong answers compensates for guesses made by the
test-taker, and is called the “guessing penalty.” The raw
score is converted using a scale ranging from 200 to 800,
with separate scores provided for the verbal and math
sections, and for each subject test in SAT II. Scores are
reported about six weeks after the test date to students
and their high schools, and to the colleges of their choice.
Students may take the SAT more than once, and many do,
hoping to improve upon their initial scores.
The SAT has been criticized on grounds of cultural
and gender bias, charges that the revised version has attempted to rectify. The widespread use of test preparation courses and services for the SAT has also generated
controversy, with detractors arguing that the test is unfair
to economically disadvantaged students, who have limited access to coaching.
Further Reading
Bartl, Lisa. 10-Minute Guide to Upping Your SAT Scores. New
York: Alpha Books/ARCO, 1996.
Carris, Joan Davenport. SAT Success. 5th ed. Princeton, NJ:
Peterson’s, 1996.
Inside the SAT. New York: Princeton Review Publications,
1995. (A multimedia format including laser optical disc,
reference manual, and practice test.)
Introducing the New SAT: The College Board’s Official Guide.
New York: College Entrance Examination Boards, 1993.

School phobia/School refusal
Reluctance or refusal to attend school.

School phobia is an imprecise, general term used to
describe a situation in which a child is reluctant to go to
school. According to the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry, refusal to go to school is most common in the period from preschool through second grade. In
most cases, school phobia is a symptom of an educational,
social, or emotional problem the child is experiencing.

The child with school phobia develops a pattern of
predictable behavior. At first, the child may begin the
day complaining that he is too sick to go to school, with
a headache, sore throat, stomachache, or other symptom.
After the parent agrees that the child may stay home
from school, he begins to feel better, although his symptoms often do not completely disappear. By the next
morning, the symptoms are back in full intensity. When
the child repeats this pattern, or simply refuses to go to
school without complaining of any symptoms of illness
on a chronic and consistent basis, school phobia is considered to have evolved into school refusal (or school refusal syndrome).
School refusal is a diagnostic criterion for separation anxiety disorder, a mental condition characterized
by abnormally high anxiety concerning possible or actual separation from parents or other individuals to whom
the child is attached. When school refusal is related to
separation anxiety disorder, it is likely that the child will
also display aversion to other activities (after-school
clubs and sports, birthday parties, summer camp) that involve being away from the person to whom the child is
attached. In addition, he may cling to the person, and
refuse to allow her out of his sight for even short periods
of time. Children experiencing separation anxiety disorder and school refusal may express feelings of fear when
left alone in a room.
Refusal to go to school may begin as a result of any
of the following stresses: birth of a sibling; death of a
family member, close friend, or pet; change in school,
such as a new teacher; loss of a friend due to a move or
change in school; or a change in family, such as divorce
or remarriage. It may also follow summer vacation or
holiday break, when the young child has spent more time
with his primary caregiver.
Almost every child will display behavior to avoid
going to school—for academic or social reasons—at
some point during his school career. In these cases, the
situation the child is trying to avoid is usually temporary—an argument with a friend, the threat of a bully, or
the consequences of a missed homework assignment, for
example. When the avoidance of school becomes a
chronic pattern, the child may develop serious social and
academic problems. A professional counselor or child
psychiatrist working with the child’s teacher and other
school personnel can all support the family in overcoming a child’s refusal to go to school.
Returning the child to school is the highest priority
so that disruption to the child’s educational and emotional development is minimized. Depending on the
severity of the fears that produced the symptom of
school refusal, ongoing counseling or psychiatric treat-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

561

School phobia/School refusal

The Mathematical Reasoning sections consist of
multiple-choice questions covering arithmetic, algebra,
and geometry; quantitative comparison (which are also
multiple choice); and a section of problems requiring
students to calculate their own answers (multiple-choice
answers are not provided). Students are allowed (and encouraged) to use calculators for the math sections.

School psychology

ment may be necessary for a length of time, even after
the child is successfully back in school.
Further Reading
Kahn, Jack. Unwillingly to School. New York: Pergamon Press,
1981.

School psychology
One of the human service fields of psychology
whose aim is to help students, teachers, parents,
and others understand each other.

Developed in 1896 at the University of Pennsylvania
in a clinic that studied and treated children considered
morally or mentally defective, the field of school psychology today includes 30,000 psychologists, most of
whom work in educational systems throughout the United States.
School psychologists, in various roles within the
school systems they serve, focus on the development and
adjustment of the child in his or her school setting.
School psychologists minimally are required to have
completed two years of training after earning a bachelor’s degree; those who have earned their Ph.Ds. may
hold administrative or supervisory positions and are
often involved in training teachers and psychologists.
School psychologists play a key role in the development
of school policies and procedures.
School psychologists administer and interpret tests
and assist teachers with classroom-related problems and
learning difficulties. School psychologists play a key
role in addressing behavior issues in the classroom, and
in working with parents and teachers to develop strategies to deal with behavior problems.
In some cases, the school psychologist provides
teachers and parents with information about students’
progress and potential, while advising them how to help
students increase their achievement. They also promote
communication between parents, teachers, administrators, and other psychologists in the school system.
See also National Association of School Psychologists.

Scientific method
An approach to research that relies on observation
and data collection, hypothesis testing, and the falsifiability of ideas.
562

The scientific method involves a wide array of approaches and is better seen as an overall perspective
rather than a single, specific method. The scientific
method that has been adopted was initially based on the
concept of positivism, which involved the search for
general descriptive laws that could be used to predict
natural phenomena. Once predictions were possible, scientists could attempt to control the occurrence of those
phenomena. Subsequently, scientists developed underlying explanations and theories. In the case of psychology,
the goal would be to describe, to predict, then to control
behavior, with knowledge based on underlying theory.
Although the positivist approach to science has undergone change and scientists are continually redefining
the philosophy of science, the premises on which it was
based continue to be the mainstream of current research.
One of the prime requisites of a scientific approach is
falsifiability; that is, a theory is seen as scientific if it
makes predictions that can be demonstrated as true or
false. Another critical element of the scientific method is
that it relies on empiricism, that is, observation and data
collection.
Research often involves the hypothetico-inductive
method. The scientist starts with a hypothesis based on
observation, insight, or theory. A hypothesis is a tentative
statement of belief based on the expert judgment of the
researcher. This hypothesis must be subject to falsification; that is, the research needs to be set up in such a way
that the scientist is able to conclude logically either that
the hypothesis is correct or incorrect. In many cases, a research project may allow the scientist to accept or reject a
hypothesis and will lead to more research questions.
Psychologists employ a diversity of scientific approaches. These include controlled experiments that
allow the researcher to determine cause and effect relationships; correlation methods that reveal predictable relations among variables; case studies involving in-depth
study of single individuals; archival approaches that
make novel use of records, documents, and other existing information; and surveys and questionnaires about
opinions and attitudes.
Because the scientific method deals with the approach to research rather than the content of the research, disciplines are not regarded as scientific because
of their content, but rather because of their reliance on
data and observation, hypothesis testing, and the falsifiability of their ideas. Thus, scientific research legitimately includes the study of attitudes, intelligence, and other
complicated human behaviors. Although the tools that
psychologists use to measure human behavior may not
lead to the same degree of precision as those in some
other sciences, it is not the precision that determines the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Research method.

Security objects
A soft, clingable object that provides the child with
security and comfort in mildly or moderately fearful situations.

Security objects are items, usually soft and easily
held or carried, that offer a young child comfort. Security objects are also referred to as attachment objects,
inanimate attachment agents, nonsocial attachments,
comfort habits, transitional objects, not-me possessions,
substitute objects, cuddlies, treasured possessions,
soothers, pacifiers, special soft objects, Linus phenomenon, and security blankets.

Early history
In the 1940s, attachment to a special object was regarded as a childhood fetish reflecting pathology in the
relationship between the mother and her child (Wulff,
1946). D. W. Winnicott (1953), however, regarded the object as necessary for normal development: it was a “transitional” experience, intermediate between the infant’s
ability to distinguish the inner subjective world from outside reality. John Bowlby considered transitional objects
to be a “substitute” for the absent mother, and he deemed
the child’s attachment to them normal and even desirable.
Nevertheless, throughout the 1970s, but progressively less in the 1980s and 1990s, a stigma remained attached to children who hugged a blanket in times of
stress. The popular—but now generally discredited—
stereotype was that these children, being overly anxious
and insecure, were better off without their blanket. As a
result, the blanket was often taken away from the child,
sometimes forcibly, just when it could have been beneficial. Although some disagreement and inconsistency persist in the research literature, there is no justification for
such drastic actions. Evidence does not support ascribing
psychopathology to children just because they demonstrate an attachment to a security object. Blanket-attached children appear to be neither more nor less maladjusted or insecure than other children.

necessary transition between the child’s outside and inside
worlds once the child has formed a sufficient relationship
with the mother. It helps augment feelings of personal
control and continuity of the self. Ethological theory argues that the comfort object substitutes for the mother and
should form only if attachment to the mother is secure.
Social learning theory states that the physical characteristics of the object (softness, warmth, fuzziness, etc.) can be
rewarding per se. Furthermore, if the mother’s nuturing
and distress-reducing presence is associated with the inanimate object, attachment behaviors toward the object may
ensue. Because the child is able to control a security object more readily than the mother, attachment to it should
begin to develop relatively independently of the mother.
It is not, however, clear from any of these theories
why some children engage in comfort habits while others do not. Child-rearing practices are frequently cited as
contributing factors, especially children’s sleeping
arrangements and parental behavior at bedtime, but evidence has largely been inconclusive. Cultural and socioeconomic factors have received stronger support, although, again, the exact mechanisms underlying the differential acquisition of nonsocial attachments remain unclear. A mother’s sensitivity to her children’s security
needs may be relevant, but the quality of the motherchild relationship seems not to be. However, preliminary
evidence suggests that the security of a child’s attachment to the mother does predict how a security object
will be used in novel situations.
One problem in evaluating attachments to objects is
the lack of uniformity in definitions and criteria. Divergent theoretical positions as well as cultural backgrounds
have brought forth a variety of interpretations. Another
complication involves the unreliability of adults’ recollections about former treasured possessions. In studies attempting to link older children’s or adults’ current behaviors with their previous relationships to a special object,
they—or their parents—are requested to recall details.
However, such retrospective reports may misrepresent actual events. When college students and their mothers
were questioned, 24% of the pairs disagreed totally about
whether there had been a childhood attachment, and an
additional 19% disagreed on what the object was (Mahalski, 1982). In a follow-up study one year later, 18% of the
students contradicted their earlier statements about having had a security object! Clearly, mothers’ concurrent reports and investigators’ direct observations are necessary
to generate reliable information about security objects.

Theoretical underpinnings
Three current theories pertain to nonsocial attachment. Psychoanalytic theory surmises that it is created as a

Cultural issues
Despite current theoretical assertions that attachment to transitional objects is normal and almost univer-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

563

Security objects

scientific status of a discipline, but rather the means by
which ideas are generated and tested.

Security objects

sal, it should be pointed out that this attachment is culture-specific. For instance, in the United States, 60% of
children have at least a mild degree of attachment to a
soft, inanimate object some time during their life, and
32% exhibit strong attachment (Passman and Halonen,
1979). The incidence of attachments to soft objects in
the Netherlands, New Zealand, and Sweden is comparable to that in the United States. Korean children have
substantially fewer attachments to blankets (18%) than
do American children, but Korean-born children living in
the United States display an intermediate percentage
(34%). Only 5% of rural Italian children have transitional objects, compared to 31% of urban Romans and 62%
of foreign children living in Rome. However, just 16% of
Londoners’ children have a special security object.

Developmental trends
In a cross-sectional investigation surveying the
mothers of almost 700 children in the United States
through their first 63 months of life, R. H. Passman and
J. S. Halonen (1979) examined children’s attachments to
various classes of objects. The percentage of children
who are not attached to any object remains relatively
stable throughout the first three years, averaging around
40%, with a low of 28% at three months of age. From
33 months, it rises consistently to a high of 84% at 63
months. The number of children having at least a slight
attachment to a favorite hard toy (like blocks or a toy
truck) remains steady and low through the first four
years, averaging approximately 14%, but then drops
swiftly toward 0% through 63 months. Attachment to a
pacifier peaks early at three months, with 66% reported
as having at least some attachment. Pacifier usage declines quickly through the first 18 months, after which
attachments are extremely unusual (averaging under
3%) through 63 months. Attachment to blankets begins
at a later age than it does to pacifiers. Mild attachment
to a blanket is rare at 3 months (8%), but increases
somewhat through 15 months (22%), peaks rapidly at
18 months (60%), stays near this level through 39
months (57%), tapers off to 40% at 48 months, and falls
suddenly to 16% through 63 months. Simultaneous attachment to both a pacifier and a blanket is infrequent; it
rises from 4% at 3 months to 12% at 9 months, remains
at a relative plateau through 21 months, then drops
sharply, averaging about 1% thereafter. Passman and
Halonen also investigated children’s intense attachments
to these objects and found similar patterns with respect
to age. At three months, 16% are strongly attached to
pacifiers. Strong attachment to blankets peaks at 18 and
24 months (32%), stays near this high level through 39
months, and diminishes steadily to 8% through 63
months. Generally in the United States, attachments to
564

various objects are now regarded as conventional
throughout the first five years of life.

Advantages of having security objects
Being attached to a security object can be beneficial
to a child. Left in an unfamiliar playroom with a supportive agent (mother or transitional object), children played,
explored, and refrained from crying more so than did
children who had their favorite hard toy or who had no
supportive agent available (Passman & Weisberg, 1975).
Thus, children’s attachment to a special soft object is
something qualitatively different from their relationship
with a noncuddly toy. The blanket provided comfort as
well as the mother did—but only if the children were attached to it; nonattached children entering the room with
their blanket adapted relatively poorly, with greater dismay. The security blanket, therefore, is aptly named; it
indeed provides security to those attached to it.
Because security objects may serve as a substitute
for the mother in her absence, they can be employed
practicably by parents, teachers, doctors, babysitters, and
other professionals. Besides facilitating separation from
the mother or father, the attachment object can promote
interactions with strangers. At bedtime, it can soothe and
facilitate sleep. A study by G. J. Ybarra, R. H. Passman,
and C. Eisenberg found that during a routine third-year
pediatric examination, the security object enhanced rapport with the examining nurse. Children attached to a
blanket who were allowed access to it were rated as less
distressed and experienced less physiological stress—as
evidenced by heart rate and systolic blood pressure—
than children undergoing the medical evaluation without
their security object. The comfort provided by a blanket
in novel situations has even been shown to enhance children’s learning (Passman, 1977).

Alternatives to blankets
A variety of soft objects besides the blanket (e.g., diapers, pillow cases, sheepskins, soft toys, stuffed animals,
dolls, napkins, handkerchiefs) may also provide security.
Furthermore, research has shown that representations of
the mother (e.g., films, videotapes, photographs, audiotapes of her) can also help children’s adjustment. Although most children are thought to respond to their special object through touching or sucking, merely seeing
(or hearing) it seems sufficient. Even an object as tactile
as the security blanket does not have to be touched; visual
contact alone evokes its soothing effects. For children too
young for an attachment to a blanket, the pacifier seems
to share many of the same functional characteristics (although its origins may be different).

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The positive effects of an attachment to an object
have restrictions. If the situation is particularly arousing
or threatening, the attachment object can be less effective
in providing security than the child’s mother.
Richard H. Passman Ph.D.

Van Ijzendoorn, M. H., F. A. Goosens, L. W. C. Tavecchio, M.
M. Vergeer, and F. O. A. Hubbard. “Attachments to Soft
Objects: Its Relationship with Attachment to the Mother
and with Thumbsucking.” Child Psychiatry and Human
Development 14, 1983, pp. 97-105.
Winnicott, D. W. “Transitional Objects and Transitional Phenomena: A Study of the First Not-Me Possession.” International Journal of Psycho-analysis 34, 1953, pp. 89-97.
Wulff, M. “Fetishism and Object Choice in Early Childhood.”
Psychoanalytic Quarterly 15, 1946, pp. 450-71.

Further Reading
Greenberg, Mark T., Dante Cicchetti, and E. Mark Cummings,
eds. Attachment in the Preschool Years: Theory, Research,
and Intervention. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1990.
Adams, R. E., and R. H. Passman. “Effects of Visual and Auditory Aspects of Mothers and Strangers on the Play and
Exploration of Children.” Developmental Psychology 15,
1979, pp. 269-74.
Haslam, N. “Temperament and the Transitional Object.” Child
Psychiatry and Human Development 22, 1992, pp. 237-47.
Hong, K. M., and B. D. Townes. “Infants’Attachment to Inanimate Objects: A Cross-Cultural Study.” Journal of the
American Academy of Child Psychiatry 15, 1976, pp. 49-61.
Mahalski, P. “The Reliability of Memories for Attachment to
Special, Soft Objects During Childhood.” Journal of the
American Academy of Child Psychiatry 21, 1982, pp.
465-67.
Mahalski, P. A., P. A. Silva, and G. F. S. Spears. “Children’s
Attachment to Soft Objects at Bedtime, Child Rearing,
and Child Development.” Journal of the American Academy of Child Psychiatry 24, 1985, pp.442-46.
Passman, R. H. “Arousal-Reducing Properties of Attachment
Objects: Testing the Functional Limits of the Security
Blanket Relative to the Mother.” Developmental Psychology 12, 1976, pp. 468-69.
———. “Providing Attachment Objects to Facilitate Learning
and Reduce Distress: Effects of Mothers and Security
Blankets.” Developmental Psychology 13, 1977, pp. 25-28.
———. “Attachments to Inanimate Objects: Are Children
Who Have Security Blankets Insecure?” Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 55, 1987, pp. 825-30.
Passman, R. H., and R. E. Adams. “Preferences for Mothers
and Security Blankets and Their Effectiveness as Reinforcers for Young Children’s Behavior.” Journal of Child
Psychology and Psychiatry 23, 1982, pp. 223-36.
Passman, R. H., and J. S. Halonen. “A Developmental Survey
of Young Children’s Attachments to Inanimate Objects.”
Journal of Genetic Psychology 134, 1979, pp. 165-78.
Passman, R. H., and L. A. Lautmann. “Fathers’, Mothers’, and
Security Blankets’ Effects on the Responsiveness of
Young Children during Projective Testing.” Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology 50, 1982, pp. 310-12.
Passman, R. H., and P. Weisberg. “Mothers and Blankets as
Agents for Promoting Play and Exploration by Young
Children in a Novel Environment: The Effects of Social
and Nonsocial Attachment Objects.” Developmental Psychology 11, 1975, pp. 170-77.

Self-actualization
A prominent term in humanistic psychology that
refers to the basic human need for self-fulfillment.

The term self-actualization was used most extensively by Abraham Maslow, who placed it at the apex
of his hierarchy of human motives, which is conceived as
a pyramid ascending from the most basic biological
needs, such as hunger and thirst, to increasingly complex
ones, such as belongingness and self-esteem. The needs
at each level must be at least partially satisfied before
those at the next can be addressed. Thus, while Maslow
considered self-actualization to be the highest motivation possible and the essence of mental health, he recognized that most people are too preoccupied with more
basic needs to seek it actively.
To arrive at a detailed description of self-actualization, Maslow studied historical figures—including
Thomas Jefferson (1743-1826), Jane Addams (18601935), Albert Einstein (1879-1955), Eleanor Roosevelt
(1884-1962), and Martin Luther King, Jr. (19291968)—whom he believed had made extraordinary use
of their potential and looked for common characteristics. He found that self-actualizers were creative, spontaneous, and able to tolerate uncertainty. Other common qualities included a good sense of humor, concern for the welfare of humanity, deep appreciation of
the basic experiences of life, and a tendency to establish close personal relationships with a few people.
Maslow also formulated a list of behaviors that he believed could lead to self-actualization. These included
such directives as: experience life with the full absorption and concentration of a child; try something new;
listen to your own feelings rather than the voices of
others; be honest; be willing to risk unpopularity by
disagreeing with others; assume responsibility; work
hard at whatever you do; and identify and be willing to
give up your defenses.
Carl Rogers also emphasized the importance of
self-actualization in his client-centered therapeutic

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

565

Self-actualization

Limitations

Self-concept

Self-concept
The way in which one perceives oneself.

Self-concept—the way in which one perceives oneself—can be divided into categories, such as personal
self-concept (facts or one’s own opinions about oneself,
such as “I have brown eyes” or “I am attractive”); social
self-concept (one’s perceptions about how one is regarded by others: “people think I have a great sense of
humor”); and self-ideals (what or how one would like to
be: “I want to be a lawyer” or “I wish I were thinner”).

Abraham Maslow studied strong historical figures, like
Eleanor Roosevelt, in his studies on self-actualization. (The
Library of Congress. Reproduced with permission.)

approach and theoretical writings. Like Maslow, he
used the term to designate a universal and innate tendency toward growth and fulfillment that governs the
human personality. Rogers believed that self-actualization is closely related to each individual’s perceived reality and self-concept—the way one thinks
of oneself. According to Rogers, one’s self-concept
can become distorted by the need for approval by others, which can lead to alienation from one’s true beliefs and desires and suppression of one’s self-actualizing tendency. Rogers’ client-centered therapy is
based on the idea that people will instinctively
choose the path to self-actualization on their own
once it becomes clear to them.
The Personal Orientation Inventory, a test designed
to measure self-actualization, is based on Maslow’s writings and consists of 12 scales, including time competence, inner directedness, spontaneity, self-acceptance,
and capacity for intimate contact.
Further Reading
Maslow, Abraham. Toward a Psychology of Being. Princeton:
Van Nostrand, 1968.
———. Motivation and Personality. 2d ed. New York: Harper
and Row, 1970.
Rogers, Carl. On Becoming a Person: A Therapist’s View of
Psychotherapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1970.
566

While a number of philosophers and psychologists
have addressed the idea that behavior is influenced by
the way people see themselves, investigation into the
importance of self-concept is most closely associated
with the writings and therapeutic practices of Carl
Rogers. The self—and one’s awareness of it—lie at the
heart of Rogers’ client-centered therapy and the philosophy behind it. According to Rogers, one’s self-concept influences how one regards both oneself and one’s
environment. The self-concept of a mentally healthy
person is consistent with his or her thoughts, experiences, and behavior. However, people may maintain a
self-concept that is at odds with their true feelings to
win the approval of others and “fit in,” either socially or
professionally. This involves repressing their true feelings and impulses, which eventually causes them to become alienated from themselves, distorting their own
experience of the world and limiting their potential for
self-actualization, or fulfillment. The gulf between a
person’s self-concept and his or her actual experiences
(which Rogers called incongruence) is a chronic source
of anxiety and can even result in mental disorders. According to Rogers, a strong self-concept is flexible and
allows a person to confront new experiences and ideas
without feeling threatened.
Social psychologists have pointed out that self-concept also plays an important role in social perception—
the process by which we form impressions of others. Attribution—how we explain the causes of our own and
other people’s behavior—is particularly influenced by
our own self-concept. Social learning theory is also concerned with the ways in which we view ourselves, especially in terms of our perceived impact on our environment. In the first major theory of social learning, Julian
B. Rotter claimed that the expected outcome of an action
and the value we place on that outcome determine much
of our behavior. For example, people whose positive selfconcept leads them to believe they will succeed at a task
are likely to behave in ways that ultimately lead to success, while those who expect failure are much more likely
to bring it about through their own actions. In a general

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Rogers, Carl. Client-Centered Therapy. Boston: Beacon Press,
1952.
Rogers, Carl, and B. Stevens. Person to Person: The Problem
of Being Human. New York: Pocket Books, 1967.
Rotter, Julian B., June Chance, and Jerry Phares. Applications
of a Social Learning Theory of Personality. New York:
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, 1972.

Self-conscious emotions
Emotions such as guilt, pride, shame, and hubris.

Succeeding or failing to meet the standards, rules,
and goals of one’s group or society determines how well
an individual forms relationships with other members of
the group. Living up to one’s own internalized set of
standards—or failing to live up to them—is the basis of
complex emotions. The so-called self-conscious emotions, such as guilt, pride, shame, and hubris, require a
fairly sophisticated level of intellectual development. To
feel them, individuals must have a sense of self as well
as a set of standards. They must also have notions of
what constitutes success and failure, and the capacity to
evaluate their own behavior.
Self-conscious emotions are difficult to study. For one
thing, there are no clear elicitors of these emotions. Joy
registers predictably on a person’s face at the approach of a
friend, and caution appears at the approach of a stranger.
But what situation is guaranteed to elicit pride or shame,
guilt or embarrassment? These emotions are so dependent
on a person’s own experience, expectations, and culture,
that it is difficult to design uniform experiments.
Some psychoanalysts, notably Sigmund Freud and
Erik Erikson, argued that there must be some universal
elicitors of shame, such as failure at toilet training or exposure of the backside. But the idea of an automatic
noncognitive elicitor does not make much sense. Cognitive processes are likely to be the elicitors of these complex emotions. It is the way people think or what they
think about that becomes the elicitor of pride, shame,
guilt, or embarrassment. There may be a one-to-one correspondence between certain thoughts and certain emo-

tions; however, in the case of self-conscious emotions,
the elicitor is a cognitive event. This does not mean that
the earlier primary emotions are elicited by noncognitive
events. Cognitive factors may play a role in eliciting any
emotion, but the nature of the cognitive events is much
less articulated and differentiated in the primary than in
the self-conscious emotions.
Those who study self-conscious emotions have
begun to determine the role of the self in such emotions,
and in particular the age at which the notion of self
emerges in childhood.
Recently, models of these emotions are beginning to
emerge. These models provide testable distinctions between often-confused emotions, such as guilt and shame.
Moreover, nonverbal tools for studying these emotions in
children are being developed. As a result, models exist to
explain when and how self-conscious emotions develop.
The self-conscious emotions depend on the development of a number of cognitive skills. First, individuals
must absorb a set of standards, rules, and goals. Second,
they must have a sense of self. And finally, they must be
able to evaluate the self with regard to those standards,
rules, and goals and then make a determination of success or failure.
As a first step in self-evaluation, a person has to decide whether a particular event is the result of his or her
own action. If, for example, an object breaks while you
are using it, you might blame yourself for breaking it, or
you might decide the object was faulty. If you place the
blame on yourself, you are making an internal attribution. If you decide the object was defective, then you are
making an external attribution. If you don’t blame yourself, chances are you will give the matter no more
thought. But if you do blame yourself, you are likely to
go on to the next step of evaluation. Whether a person is
inclined to make an internal or an external attribution depends on the situation and on the individual’s own characteristics. Some people are likely to blame themselves
no matter what happens.
Psychologists still do not entirely understand how
people decide what constitutes success and failure after
they have assumed responsibility for an event. This aspect of self-evaluation is particularly important because
the same standards, rules, and goals can result in radically different feelings, depending on whether success or
failure is attributed to oneself. Sometimes people assess
their actions in ways that do not conform to the evaluation that others might give them. Many factors are involved in producing inaccurate or unique evaluations.
These include early failures in the self system, leading to
narcissistic disorders, harsh socialization experiences,
and high levels of reward for success or punishment for

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

567

Self-conscious emotions

theory of personality he developed subsequently with
two colleagues, Rotter designated variables based on the
ways that individuals habitually think about their experiences. One of the most important was I-E, which distinguished “internals,” who think of themselves as controlling events, from “externals,” who view events as largely
outside their control. Internal-external orientation has
been found to affect a variety of behaviors and attitudes.

Self-conscious emotions

failure. The evaluation of one’s own behavior in terms of
success and failure plays a very important role in shaping an individual’s goals and new plans.
In a final evaluation step, an individual determines
whether success or failure is global or specific. Global attributions come about when a person is inclined to focus
on the total self. Some individuals, some of the time, attribute the success or failure of a particular action to the
total self: they use such self-evaluative phrases as “I am
bad (or good).” On such occasions, the focus is not on the
behavior, but on the self, both as object and as subject.
Using such global attribution results in thinking of nothing else but the self. During these times, especially when
the global evaluation is negative, a person becomes confused and speechless. The individual is unable to act and
is driven away from action, wanting to hide or disappear.
In some situations, individuals make specific attributions focusing on specific actions. Thus, it is not the total
self that has done something wrong or good; instead, a
particular behavior is judged. At such times, individuals
will use such evaluative phrases as, “What I did was
wrong, and I must not do it again.” Notice that the individual’s focus here is not on the totality of the self, but on
the specific behavior of the self in a specific situation.
The tendency to make global or specific attributions
may be a personality style. Global attributions for negative events are generally uncorrelated with global attributions for positive events. It is only when positive or negative events are taken into account that relatively stable
and consistent attributional patterns are observed. Some
individuals are likely to be stable in their global and specific evaluations under most conditions of success or
failure. Such factors are thought to have important consequences for a variety of fixed personality patterns. For
example, Beck (1979) and others have found that depressed individuals are likely to make stable, negative,
global attributions, whereas nondepressed individuals
are less likely to be stable in their global attributions.

Shame and guilt

The power of shame drives people to employ strategies to rid themselves of this feeling. These strategies
may generate behavior that is generally considered abnormal. Some people readjust their notions of success
and failure, at least as they apply to their own actions.
The narcissistic personality, for example, perceives its
actions to be successful while others perceive them as
failure. The narcissist is characterized by an exaggerated
sense of his or her own accomplishments and is likely to
appear hubristic. But underlying the bombast is an attempt to avoid the exaggerated shame the narcissist may
really feel. In contrast to the narcissist, a depressed person may be acutely aware of shame and feel helpless,
hopeless, and worthless.
Shame and guilt are not produced by any specific
situation, but rather by an individual’s interpretation of
an event. Even more important is the observation that
shame is not necessarily related to whether the event is
public or private. Although many theorists hold that
shame is a public failure, this need not be so. Failure attributed to the self can be public or private, and can center around moral as well as social action.
Guilt is produced when an individual evaluates his
or her behavior as a failure, but focuses on the specific
features of the self that led to the failure. A guilty person
is likely to feel responsible and try to repair the failure.
Guilty individuals are pained by their evaluation of failure. Guilt is often associated with a corrective action that
the individual can take (but does not necessarily take) to
repair the failure and prevent it from happening again
(Barrett, 1995; Tangney, 1990). In guilt, the self is differentiated from the object.

Hubris and pride

An important determinant of whether shame or guilt
follows failure to live up to a standard is whether a person believes he could have avoided the violating act. If
not, shame is likely. If the person feels he could have
done otherwise, guilt is likely to occur.
Shame or guilt occurs when an individual judges his
or her actions as a failure in regard to his or her standards,
rules, and goals and then makes a global attribution. The
person wishes to hide, disappear, or die (Lewis, 1992;
Nathanson, 1987). It is a highly negative and painful state
that also disrupts ongoing behavior and causes confusion
in thought and an inability to speak. The body of the
568

shamed person seems to shrink, as if to disappear from
the eye of the self or others. Because of the intensity of
this emotional state, and the global attack on the self system, all that individuals can do when presented with such
a state is to attempt to rid themselves of it. Its global nature, however, makes it very difficult to dissipate.

Self-consciousness is not entirely a negative feeling.
Self-evaluation can also lead to positive and even overly
positive emotions. Hubris, defined as exaggerated pride
or self-confidence, is an example of the latter. Hubris is
the emotion elicited when success with regard to one’s
standards, rules, and goals is applied to a person’s entire
self. People inclined to be hubristic evaluate their actions
positively and then say to themselves: “I have succeeded.
I am a success.” Often, hubris is considered an undesirable trait to be avoided.
Hubris is difficult to sustain because of its globality.
The feeling is generated by a nonspecific action. Be-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

An individual who considers himself or herself
globally successful may be viewed with disdain by others. Often the hubristic person is described as “puffed
up” or, in extreme cases, grandiose or narcissistic. The
hubristic person may be perceived as insolent or contemptuous. Hubristic people have difficulty in interpersonal relations, since their hubris likely makes them insensitive to the wishes, needs, and desires of others,
leading to interpersonal conflict. Moreover, given the
contemptuousness associated with hubris, other people
are likely to be shamed by the nature of the actions of the
hubristic person. Narcissists often derive pleasure in
shaming others by claiming their superiority.
If hubris is the global emotion that follows a positive
assessment of an action, then pride is the specific emotion. A person experiencing pride feels joyful at the successful outcome of a particular action, thought, or feeling.
Here the focus of pleasure is specific and related to a particular behavior. In pride, the self and object are separated, as in guilt, and unlike shame and hubris, where subject and object are fused. Heckhausen (1984, 1987) and
Stipek et al. (1992) have made a particularly apt comparison between pride and achievement motivation, where
succeeding at a particular goal motivates activity. Because the positive state engendered by pride is associated
with a particular action, individuals are able to reproduce
the emotion: pride’s specific focus allows for action.

Shyness and embarrassment
In addition to the emotions already discussed, two
others bear mention—embarrassment and shyness,
which are frequently confused. Some consider shyness
to be sheepishness, bashfulness, uneasiness, or psychological discomfort in social situations. According to this
definition, shyness is related to fear and is a nonevaluative emotion precipitated by an individual’s discomfort
with others. Such a description fits Buss’s (1980) notion
of shyness as an emotional response elicited by experiences of novelty or conspicuousness. For Buss (1980),
shyness and fear are closely related and represent fear of
others. One way of distinguishing shyness from shame,
with which it is sometimes confused, is that it appears
much earlier in childhood than either shame or guilt.
This approach to shyness seems reasonable because
it fits with other notions relating the self to others, or

what we might call the “social self.” Eysenck (1954) has
characterized people as social or asocial by genetic disposition, and recently Kagan, Reznick, and Snidman
(1988) have pointed out the physiological responses of
children they call “inhibited.” Inhibited children are
withdrawn, are uncomfortable in social situations, and
appear fearful. Shyness may be a dispositional factor not
related to self-evaluation. Rather, it may simply be the
discomfort of being in the company of other social objects; in other words, it is the opposite of sociability.
If shyness does not seem to rely on self-evaluation,
embarrassment often does. It is important, however, to
distinguish among types of embarrassment. Sometimes,
the self-consciousness of shyness can lead a person to
become embarrassed (Buss, 1980). In certain situations
of exposure, people become embarrassed, but this is not
related to negative evaluation. Perhaps the best example
of this is the case of a compliment. A speaker might feel
embarrassed after a particularly flattering introduction.
Surprisingly, praise, rather than the displeasure resulting
from negative evaluation, elicits such embarrassment.
Another example of this type of embarrassment can
be seen in people’s reactions to public display. When people observe someone looking at them, they are apt to become self-conscious, look away, and touch or adjust their
bodies. Women being observed often adjust or touch their
hair. Men may adjust their clothes or change their body
posture. In few cases do the observed people look sad; if
anything, they appear pleased by the attention. The combination of a briefly averted gaze and nervous touching
characterizes the first type of embarrassment.
A related example of embarrassment from exposure
can be seen in the work of Lewis et al. (1991) which
demonstrates that embarrassment can be elicited just by
exposure. In their experiment, a professor, announcing
that he is going to randomly point to a student, and
shows that pointing is random and does not reflect a
judgment about the person, closes his eyes and points.
The pointing invariably elicits embarrassment in the student selected, even though the student has done nothing,
good or bad, to deserve attention.
In each of these examples, there is no negative evaluation of the self in regard to standards, rules, and goals.
Nevertheless, work with children has shown that a sense
of self is a prerequisite for feeling embarrassment (Lewis
et al., 1989). In these situations, it is difficult to imagine
embarrassment as related to shame. Since praise cannot
readily lead to an evaluation of failure, it is likely that
embarrassment resulting from compliments, from being
looked at, and from being pointed to, has more to do
with the exposure of the self than with evaluation. Situations other than praise come to mind, in which a negative

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

569

Self-conscious emotions

cause such a feeling is alluring, yet transient, people
prone to hubris ultimately derive little satisfaction from
the emotion. Consequently, they seek out and invent situations likely to repeat this emotional state. According to
Morrison (1989), this can be done either by altering their
standards, rules, and goals, or by reevaluating what constitutes success.

Self-esteem

evaluation is inferred (perhaps incorrectly). Take, for example, walking into a crowded meeting room before the
speaker has started to talk. It is possible to arrive on time
only to find people already seated. When walking into
the room, eyes turn toward you, and you may experience
embarrassment. One could say that there is a negative
self-evaluation: “I should have been earlier, I should not
have made noise.” However, the experience of embarrassment in this case may not be elicited by negative
self-evaluation, but simply by public exposure.
In contrast, a second type of embarrassment is closely related to shame and is therefore dependent on selfevaluation. For Izard (1977) and Tomkins (1963), embarrassment is distinguished from shame by the intensity of
the latter. Whereas shame appears to be strong and disruptive, embarrassment is clearly less intense and does
not involve disruption of thought and language. Furthermore, people who are embarrassed do not assume the
posture of someone wishing to hide, disappear, or die. In
fact, their bodies reflect an ambivalent approach and
avoidance posture. An embarrassed person alternatively
looks at people and then looks away, smiling all the
while. In contrast, the shamed person rarely smiles while
averting his or her gaze. Thus, from a behavioral point of
view, shame and embarrassment appear to be different.
The difference in intensity can probably be attributed to the nature of the failed standard, rule, or goal.
Some standards are more or less associated with the core
of self; for one person, failure at driving a car is less important than failing to help someone. Failures associated
with less important and less central standards, rules, and
goals result in embarrassment rather than shame.
The study of self-conscious emotions has only recently begun. The model outlined here offers an opportunity to
consider and to define carefully some of the self-conscious emotions. Unless we develop a more accurate taxonomy, we will be unable to proceed in our study of these
emotions. Given the renewed interest in emotional life, it
is now appropriate to consider these more complex emotions rather than the primary ones. Moreover, as others
have pointed out, these self-conscious emotions are intimately connected with other emotions, such as anger and
sadness. Finally, given the place of self-evaluation in adult
life, it seems clear that the self-conscious evaluative emotions are likely to stand in the center of our emotional life.

Beck, A.T. Cognitive Therapy and the Emotional Disorders.
New York: Times Mirror, 1979.
Buss, A.H. Self Consciousness and Social Anxiety. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman, 1980.
Dweck, C.S., and E.L. Leggett. “A Social Cognitive Approach
to Motivation and Personality.” Psychological Review 95,
(1988): 256-73.
Edelman, R.J., and S.E. Hampson. “The Recognition of Embarrassment.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin
7, (1981): 109-116.
Ferguson, T.J., and H. Stegge. “Children’s Understanding of
Guilt and Shame.” Child Development 62, (1991): 82739.
Eysenck, H.J. The Psychology of Politics. London, England:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1954.
Heckhausen, H. “Emotional Components of Action: Their Ontogeny as Reflected in Achievement Behavior.” In D.
Glitz and J.F. Wohlwill (Eds.). Curiosity, Imagination and
Play: On the Development of Spontaneous Cognitive and
Motivational Processes. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1987, pp.
326-48.
Izard, C. Human Emotions. New York: Plenum Press, 1977.
Kagan, J., and N. Snidman. “Biological Bases of Childhood
Shyness.” Science 240, (1988): 167-71.
Lewis, M., M.W. Sullivan, and P. Barone. “Changes in Embarrassment as a Function of Age, Sex, and Situation.”
British Journal of Developmental Psychology 9, (1991):
485-92.
Lewis, M., M.W. Sullivan, C. Stanger, and M. Weiss. “Self-Development and Self-Conscious Emotions.” Child Development 60, (1989): 146-56.
Lewis, M. Shame, the Exposed Self. New York: The Free Press,
1992.
Morrison, A.P. Shame: The Underside of Narcissism. Hillsdale,
NJ: Analytic Press, 1989.
Nathanson, D.L., ed. The Many Faces of Shame. New York:
Gilford Press, 1987.
Stipek, D.J. and S. McClintic. “Self-Evaluation in Young Children.” Monographs of the Society for Research in Child
Development 57 (Serial No. 226), 1992.
Tangney, J.P., “Assessing Individual Differences in Proneness
to Shame and Guilt: Development of the Self-Conscious
Affect and Attribution Inventory.” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology 59, (1990): 102-111.
Tangney, J.P., and K.W. Fischer, eds. Self-Conscious Emotions:
Shame, Guilt and Pride. New York: Guilford, 1995.
Tomkins, S.S. Affect, Imagery, and Consciousness: Volume 2:
The Negative Affects. New York: Springer, 1963.

Michael Lewis
Further Reading

Self-esteem

Barrett, K. “A Functionalist Approach to Shame and Guilt.” In
J. Tangney and K. Fischer (Eds.). Self-Conscious Emotions. New York: Guilford, 1995, pp. 25-63.

Considered an important component of emotional
health, self-esteem encompasses both self-confidence and self-acceptance.

570

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Much research has been conducted in the area of developing self-esteem in children. Martin Seligman
claims that in order for children to feel good about themselves, they must feel that they are able to do things well.
He claims that trying to shield children from feelings of
sadness, frustration, and anxiety when they fail robs
them of the motivation to persist in difficult tasks until
they succeed. It is precisely such success in the face of
difficulties that can truly make them feel good about
themselves. Seligman believes that this attempt to cushion children against unpleasant emotions is in large part
responsible for an increase in the prevalence of depression since the 1950s, an increase that he associates with
a conditioned sense of helplessness.
Self-esteem comes from different sources for children at different stages of development. The development of self-esteem in young children is heavily influenced by parental attitudes and behavior. Supportive
parental behavior, including the encouragement and
praise of mastery, as well as the child’s internalization of
the parents’ own attitudes toward success and failure, are
the most powerful factors in the development of self-esteem in early childhood. Later, older children’s experiences outside the home—in school and with peers—become increasingly important in determining their self-esteem. Schools can influence their students’ self-esteem
through the attitudes they foster toward competition and
diversity and their recognition of achievement in academics, sports, and the arts. By middle childhood, friendships have assumed a pivotal role in a child’s life. Studies have shown that school-age youngsters spend more
time with their friends than they spend doing homework,
watching television, or playing alone. In addition, the
amount of time they interact with their parents is greatly
reduced from when they were younger. At this stage, social acceptance by a child’s peer group plays a major
role in developing and maintaining self-esteem.
The physical and emotional changes that take place
in adolescence, especially early adolescence, present
new challenges to a child’s self-esteem. Boys whose
growth spurt comes late compare themselves with peers
who have matured early and seem more athletic, masculine, and confident. In contrast, early physical maturation
can be embarrassing for girls, who feel gawky and selfconscious in their newly developed bodies. Fitting in
with their peers becomes more important than ever to
their self-esteem, and, in later adolescence, relationships

with the opposite sex can become a major source of confidence or insecurity.
Further Reading
Seligman, Martin E.P. The Optimistic Child. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin Co., 1995.

Self-fulfilling prophecy
An initial expectation that is confirmed by the behavior it elicits.

One’s beliefs about other people determine how one
acts towards them, and thus play a role in determining
the behavior that results. Experiments have demonstrated
this process in a variety of settings. In one of the bestknown examples, teachers were told (falsely) that certain
students in their class were “bloomers” on the verge of
dramatic intellectual development. When the students
were tested eight months later, the “special” students
outperformed their peers, fulfilling the prediction that
had been made about them. During the intervening period, the teachers had apparently behaved in ways that facilitated the students’ intellectual development, perhaps
by giving them increased attention and support and setting higher goals for them.
In another experiment, a group of men became acquainted with a group of women by telephone after seeing what they thought were pictures of their “partners.”
The supposedly attractive women were considered more
interesting and intelligent. Researchers concluded that
the men’s own behavior had been more engaging toward
those women whom they thought were attractive, drawing livelier responses than the men who thought their
partners were unattractive.
Racial and ethnic stereotypes can become self-fulfilling prophecies if members of disadvantaged groups
are discouraged from setting ambitious goals because of
other people’s low expectations. The term self-fulfilling
prophecy can also refer to the effect that people’s beliefs
about themselves have on their own behavior. Those who
expect to succeed at a task, for example, tend to be more
successful than those who believe they will fail.
Further Reading
Halloran, James D. Attitude Formation and Change. Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press, 1976.
Harvey, Terri L., Ann L. Orbuch, and John H. Weber, eds. Attributions, Accounts, and Close Relationships. New York:
Springer-Verlag, 1992.
Weary, Gifford. Attribution. New York: Springer-Verlag,1989.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

571

Self-fulfilling prophecy

Psychologists who write about self-esteem generally
discuss it in terms of two key components: the feeling of
being loved and accepted by others and a sense of competence and mastery in performing tasks and solving
problems independently.

Self-help groups

Wyer, R. S., and T. K. Srull, eds. Handbook of Social Cognition. 2d ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates, 1994.

Self-help groups
Groups that support communities of peers with a
similar interest or illness.

Since the advent of managed health care and the
cost-controls that have accompanied it, self-help groups
have grown in popularity. Individuals who are offered
limited mental health coverage through their healthcare
plan often find self-help a positive and economical way
to gain emotional support.

Overview
Twelve-step groups, one of the most popular types
of self-help organizations, have been active in the United
States since the founding of Alcoholics Anonymous
(AA) in 1935. AA and other 12-step programs are based
on the spiritual premise that turning one’s life and will
over to “a higher power” (i.e., God, another spiritual entity, or the group itself) for guidance and self-evaluation
is the key to recovery. Outside of AA and its sister organizations (Narcotics Anonymous, or NA; Cocaine
Anonymous, or CA), a number of 12-step programs have
sprung up to treat a range of mental disorders, such as
Gambler’s Anonymous (GA), Schizophrenics Anonymous (SA), and Overeaters Anonymous (OA).
Self-help organizations also provide support for individuals who are ill or have health issues. Support exists
for people dealing with weight management, HIV, multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy, cancer, and incontinence, and for the families of individuals who suffer
from these conditions. Self-help has moved beyond what
are considered “problem” conditions to assist people
who share interests or circumstances, including support
groups for women who breast-feed (LaLeche league),
singles, older adults, and new parents.
Family self-help groups are also available. AlAnon, an organization for friends and family of alcoholics, is a companion organization to AA, as is Alateen,
a program for teenagers who have been affected by alcoholics. Support groups for caregivers of individuals with
life-threatening illnesses, such as cancer, often meet at
treatment centers and hospitals that specialize or treat the
illness in question.
A growing trend in self-help is the creation of online
support communities. Chat-rooms, bulletin boards, and
electronic mailing lists all provide convenient, around572

the-clock access to peer support. Many large-scale consumer healthcare web sites provide forums for discussion on countless diseases and disorders, and major online commercial services such as America Online (AOL)
provide sites for healthcare and patient support. In some
cases, these groups may be moderated by a healthcare
professional, although many are exclusively peer organized and populated. Some long-established self-help
groups such as the LaLeche league now hold some of
their meetings online, often out of their own web site.

Benefits
The accessibility of self-help groups is one of their
most attractive features. Since no dues or fees are required,
except for small voluntary contributions to cover meeting
expenses, organizations such as AA are the most cost-effective treatment option available. In addition, meetings are
usually easy to locate through local hospitals, healthcare
centers, churches, and other community organizations. For
AA and sister organizations, where daily attendance is encouraged if possible, the number of meetings held each
week often number in the hundreds in large metropolitan
areas. And with the proliferation of new online support
communities and rapid growth of access to the Internet,
self-help groups are becoming as accessible to individuals
in rural areas as they are to those in large cities. Online
self-help also offers the added benefit of anonymity and
breaks down any barriers of age discrepancies, physical
disabilities, race and culture differences, or other possible
inhibiting factors in a face-to-face encounter.
Participation in self-help groups provides an essential sense of community and belonging. For individuals
suffering from mental and organic illnesses, who may be
lacking emotional support and empathy from their
friends and family, this environment is a critical part of
recovery. In addition to relieving emotional isolation,
self-help groups tend to empower an individual and promote self-esteem. For example, AA encourages sponsorship (building a mentor relationship with another member), speaking at meetings, and other positive interactions with peers.
Introspection is another essential feature of many
self-help groups, particularly in organizations that follow
a 12-step program of recovery. For example, the fourth
step of AA is for members to make “a searching and
fearless moral inventory” of themselves, and the tenth
step mandates that members continue “to take personal
inventory” and admit wrongdoings. Such introspection
may be beneficial to individuals who are having difficulties coming to terms with the thoughts and emotions that
may be guiding their behavior. In this respect, a 12-step
program may resemble cognitive therapy to a degree, in

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Results
Several major studies have shown that 12-step programs can be just as, if not more, effective in treating alcohol- and drug-dependent patients as a regime of cognitive-behavioral therapy or psychotherapy. Further, if an
inpatient is started on a 12-step program while in a traditional treatment or therapy, setting and the program is
encouraged by the patient’s healthcare provider, then the
patient is more likely to remain in the 12-step program
after traditional treatment has ended.
See also Alcohol abuse and dependence; Drugs/
Drug abuse

memory. Most people have experienced this situation
where they are trying to recall a person’s name. As the
person searches through his or her memory for the name
Stern, for example, he or she will recall other similar
names—Stone, Stein—but not Douglas or Zimmer. Semantic memory appears to categorize information that has
similar meaning (in this case, surnames), that begins with
the same letter, and has the same number of syllables.
Words and other memories that are stored in semantic memory contribute to episodic memory and the two
work together to function as an effective long-term
memory system.
Further Reading
Bolles, Edmund Blair. Remembering and Forgetting: Inquiries
Into the Nature of Memory. New York: Walker and Co.,
1988.

Paula Ford-Martin

Sensitivity training

Further Reading
American Self-Help Clearinghouse. Self-Help Sourcebook Online. http://mentalhelp.net/selfhelp/

A group experience that gives people new insight
into how they relate to others.

Further Information
Alcoholics Anonymous World Services, Inc. General Service
Office. P.O. Box 459, Grand Central Station, New York,
NY, USA. 10163, fax: 212-870-3003, 212-870-3400.
http://www.alcoholics-anonymous.org.
National Self-Help Clearinghouse. Graduate School and University Center of The City University of New York, 365
5th Avenue, Suite 3300, New York, NY, USA. 10016,
212-817-1822. Email: info@selfhelpweb.org. www.selfhelpweb.org.

Semantic memory
The part of long-term memory dealing with words,
their symbols, and meanings.

Semantic memory allows humans to communicate
with language. In semantic memory, the brain stores information about words, what they look like and represent, and how they are used in an organized way. It is unusual for a person to forget the meaning of the word
“dictionary,” or to be unable to conjure up a visual image
of a refrigerator when the word is heard or read. Semantic memory contrasts with episodic memory, where
memories are dependent upon a relationship in time. An
example of an episodic memory is “I played in a piano
recital at the end of my senior year in high school.”
The “tip of the tongue” phenomenon provides some
insight into the way information is stored in semantic

Sensitivity training began in the 1940s and 1950s
with experimental studies of groups carried out by psychologist Kurt Lewin at the National Training Laboratories in Maine. Although the groups (called training or
T-groups) were originally intended only to provide research data, their members requested a more active role
in the project. The researchers agreed, and T-group experiments also became learning experiences for their
subjects. The techniques employed by Lewin and his
colleagues, collectively known as sensitivity training,
were widely adopted for use in a variety of settings. Initially, they were used to train individuals in business, industry, the military, the ministry, education, and other
professions. In the 1960s and 1970s, sensitivity training
was adopted by the human potential movement, which
introduced the “encounter group.” Although encounter
groups apply the basic T-group techniques, they emphasize personal growth, stressing such factors as self-expression and intense emotional experience.
Encounter groups generally consist of between 12
and 20 people and a facilitator who meet in an intensive
weekend session or in a number of sessions over a period
of weeks or months. The group members work on reducing defensiveness and achieving a maximum of openness
and honesty. Initially, participants tend to resist expressing their feelings fully, but eventually become more open
in discussing both their lives outside the group and the
interactions within the group itself. Gradually, a climate
of trust develops among the group members, and they in-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

573

Sensitivity training

that recognition of maladaptive thoughts can ideally lead
to a change in negative behavior.

Sensory deprivation

creasingly abandon the defenses and facades habitually
used in dealing with other people. Although the increased self-awareness resulting from sensitivity training
is presumed to change a person’s behavior in daily life,
studies of encounter-group participants have raised
doubts as to whether their training experiences actually
effect long-lasting behavioral changes. In addition, the
usefulness of encounter groups is limited to psychologically healthy individuals, as the intense and honest nature of the group discussions may prove harmful to persons with emotional disorders.
See also Group therapy
Further Reading
Kanfer, Frederick H., and Arnold P. Goldstein, eds. Helping
People Change: A Textbook of Methods, 4th ed. New
York: Pergamon Press, 1991.
Zimbardo, Philip G. The Psychology of Attitude Change and
Social Influence. Philadelphia: Temple University Press,
1991.

confinement is often regarded as the most severe form of
punishment in prisons.
The deterioration in both physical and psychological
functioning that occurs with sensory deprivation has been
linked to the need of human beings for an optimal level of
arousal. Too much or too little arousal can produce stress
and impair a person’s mental and physical abilities. Thus,
appropriate degrees of sensory deprivation may actually
have a therapeutic effect when arousal levels are too high.
A form of sensory deprivation known as REST (restricted
environmental stimulation), which consists of floating for
several hours in a dark, soundproof tank of water heated
to body temperature, has been used to treat drug and
smoking addictions, lower back pain, and other conditions associated with excessive stress.
Further Reading
Lilly, John Cunningham. The Deep Self: Profound Relaxation
and the Tank Isolation Technique. New York: Simon and
Schuster, 1977.
Solomon, Philip. Sensory Deprivation: A Symposium Held at
Harvard Medical School. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1961.

Sensory deprivation
An experimental procedure involving prolonged
reduction of sensory stimuli.

Sensory deprivation experiments of the 1950s have
shown that human beings need environmental stimulation to function normally. In a classic early experiment,
college students lay on a cot in a small, empty cubicle
nearly 24 hours a day, leaving only to eat and use the
bathroom. They wore translucent goggles that let in light
but prevented them from seeing any shapes or patterns,
and they were fitted with cotton gloves and cardboard
cuffs to restrict the sense of touch. The continuous hum
of an air conditioner and U-shaped pillows placed
around their heads blocked out auditory stimulation.
Initially, the subjects slept, but eventually they became bored, restless, and moody. They became disoriented and had difficulty concentrating, and their performance on problem-solving tests progressively deteriorated the longer they were isolated in the cubicle. Some experienced auditory or visual hallucinations. Although
they were paid a generous sum for each day they participated in the experiment, most subjects refused to continue past the second or third day. After they left the isolation chamber, the perceptions of many were temporarily
distorted, and their brain-wave patterns, which had
slowed down during the experiment, took several hours
to return to normal. The intensity of the discomfort
these volunteers experienced helps explain why solitary
574

Separation anxiety
Distress reaction to the absence of the parent or
caregiver.

Separation anxiety emerges according to a developmental timetable during the second half year in human
infants. This development reflects advancing cognitive
maturation, rather than the onset of problem behaviors.
As illustrated in the accompanying figure, infants
from cultures as diverse as Kalahari bushmen, Israeli
kibbutzim, and Guatemalan Indians display quite similar
patterns in their response to maternal separation, which
peaks at the end of the first year and gradually becomes
less frequent and less intense throughout later infancy
and the preschool years. This fact has been interpreted to
mean that the one-year-old is alerted by the absence of
the parent and tries to understand that discrete event. If it
fails, fear is created and the child cries.
Cultural practices have an impact on separation anxiety. Infants who remain in constant contact with their
mothers may show an earlier onset of separation anxiety,
and possibly more intense and longer periods of reactivity. For example, Japanese infants who are tested in
Mary Ainsworth’s Strange Situation show more intense
reactions to the separation, presumably as a result of cultural norms prescribing constant contact between mother
and infant for the first several years of life.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Separation anxiety

Like separation anxiety, researchers who observe infant emotions and behavior in the first month or two of
life generally agree that no specific fear reaction is present at this early stage. Rather, infants become distressed
due to unpleasant stimulation involving pain, discomfort, or hunger.
Typically researchers have found that by five to six
months, if a stranger stares in silence at an infant, the infant will often return the look and after about 30 seconds
begin to cry. Bronson has termed this distress reaction to
a stranger’s sober face “wariness.” Because of the gradual building up of tension in the infant, Bronson interprets the emotional distress as a reaction to the failure to
assimilate the unfamiliar face to a more familar schema.
In another words, the older infant can distinguish between familiar and unfamiliar faces, tries to understand
the distinction, and becomes upset if the new face does
not match the now familiar pattern.
A few months later, infants may react immediately to
strangers, especially if approached suddenly or picked up
by the stranger. This fear reaction, which can be readily
elicited in most infants between seven and twelve months,
has been called stranger distress or stranger anxiety.
The context and qualitative aspects of the stranger’s
approach are critical in determining how an infant might
respond. If the stranger approaches slowly when the
caregiver is nearby, smiling and speaking softly, offering
a toy, the infant will often show interest or joy, and distress is unlikely. Also, the degree of distress shown by an
infant to the silent intrusion of the stranger varies greatly
from baby to baby, a finding that many believe to be
rooted in the temperament of the infant. Finally, if the
infant finds the stranger’s approach to be ambiguous, the
caregiver’s reaction will often influence the infant’s response. Should the parent smile and warmly greet the
new person, the older infant will often use these emotional reactions as cues for how to respond.
Stranger distress was originally described by Rene
Spitz as an emotion that suddenly appears in all infants
at about 8 months. While we now understand how important a role context and cognition play in determining
this response, there is nevertheless evidence suggesting a
precise timetable for its emergence across different cultures, including Uganda, Hopi Indian, and the United
States. A genetic basis has also been shown by twin research, with identical twins showing more similar onset
of stranger distress than fraternal twins. Rather than indicating emotional difficulties, the emergence of a fear of
strangers in the second half of the first year is an indicator of cognitive development. For example, EEG and
heart rate patterns in human infants both show a major
developmental shift at this time in response to the presentation of threatening stimuli.

Children who cried during separation (in percent). These
graphs show the course of separation distress in children
of the African Bushmen, the Guatemalan Indians, lowerclass families from Antigua, Guatemala, and infants from an
Israeli kibbutz.

As infants acquire more experience in dealing with
unfamiliar persons at family outings, visits to the home,
or in day care, they no longer become distressed at the
sight of a stranger. Young children show a wide variety
of responses depending on the situation, their past experiences, and their level of sociability. Parents will want to
encourage their child’s natural curiosity and friendliness,
while at the same time teaching them that they should always rely on parental guidance and approval in dealing
with strangers.
The study of these two common fears of infancy underscores the important links between emotion and cognition. Discrepancy theories originating in the work of
Hebb and Jean Piaget provide an account of the steps in
the development of this basic emotional system in infancy and demonstrate its dependence on perceptual and
cognitive development. In addition, the importance of
context and meaning have been clearly shown in the
work of Jerome Kagan, Alan Sroufe, and others to be
the hallmark of the mature fear response, as distinct from
the general distress of early infancy.
While stranger distress and separation anxiety are
normal for one-year-old infants, should a parent become
concerned if they persist into the toddler or preschool
years? The key to answering this question depends upon
the nature of the child’s response, its intensity, and persistence over time. For example, it is commonplace for
young preschoolers to show some distress at separation
from their parents during the first week or two of daycare in a new setting. Typically this settling in period
does not last too long. If a preschooler persists in showing excessive separation anxiety even after several weeks
at a new preschool and this interferes with the child’s

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

575

Serial learning

participation with peers and teachers, parents should
consult with the teacher and other child care professionals. Childhood anxieties of this sort are generally quite
responsive to treatment, and this may be a better option
than waiting for the problem to resolve itself.
See also Strange situation; Stranger anxiety
Peter LaFreniere

ferson, and continue with their serial anticipation, using
each president as a cue for the next one. Somewhere in
the middle of the list, though, students fail to remember
names, then, toward the end of the presidents, performance improves as the students retrieve the names of
more recent presidents. Quite often, people show similar
patterns when attempting to memorize poems, prayers,
or a short text such as the Declaration of Independence.
These behaviors conform with the serial position effect
that is typical for most serial learning studies.
See also Free-recall learning.

Serial learning
Recalling patterns of facts or stimuli in the order in
which they were presented.

In some research on memory for words, the learner
is exposed to stimuli to be remembered and later recalls
those stimuli in the same order in which they initially appeared. This procedure is called serial learning. In general, when people must recall stimuli in a particular order,
they remember less material than when allowed to engage in free recall, which imposes no constraints on the
order or recall.
Hermann Ebbinghaus is credited with conducting
the first studies of verbal memory involving serial learning. Most serial learning studies use a procedure called
serial anticipation, where one stimulus is presented at a
time and the learner uses that word as a cue for the next
word. The second word then serves as a cue for the third,
and so on. One of the most consistent findings in research involving single words or nonsense syllables involves the serial position function or effect: learners
show greatest recall for stimuli at the beginning of the
list, and good but somewhat less recall for items appearing at the end of the list. Stimuli in the middle of the list
fare least well. When learners must remember single
words or nonsense syllables in free recall, the greatest
recall usually occurs at the end of the list, with good but
lower recall at the beginning. If the words to be learned
are meaningfully related, such as those in a sentence,
people tend to remember them by using serial anticipation, even when they are allowed to use free recall. The
first seven items in a list are often the easiest to learn.
This fact is consistent with the research that indicates
that, regardless of the type of learning, humans can remember “the magic number seven” items without relying on rehearsal or other mnemonic strategies.
Serial learning occurs when students attempt to
learn school-related material. For example, when trying
to remember the names of the American presidents, students typically begin with Washington, Adams, and Jef576

Serial position function
The predictable patterns of memory and forgetting
of lists of stimuli.

When a person attempts to recall a set of stimuli that
exceeds about seven items, there is a high likelihood that
he or she will forget some of them. The generally accepted limit to memory for material that is not rehearsed is
referred to as “the magic number seven” (plus or minus
two items). Most studies in this area have employed lists
of words or nonsense syllables, but the research results
hold true for a wide range of stimuli.
As a rule, if free recall is engaged, the words that are
best remembered are those from the end of the list, and
they are also likely to be the first to be recalled. This tendency for the best memory for recently presented items
is referred to as the recency effect. (The tendency for retrieving words from the beginning of a list is called the
primacy effect.) Recall will be poorest for items in the
middle of the list, unless a stimulus has special characteristics and stands out.
When a learner must use serial recall, or recall of
the stimuli in their order of presentation, the items appearing first and last on the list still show an advantage
over those in the middle, but the items at the beginning
of the list are recalled more often than items at the end of
the list, a reversal of the pattern in free recall.
The serial position effect occurs due to three factors:
distinctiveness, constraints of short-term memory, and inhibition. First, the primacy and recency effects occur because items at the beginning and the end of the list are
distinct or isolated from the other stimuli due to their positions. Second, short-term memory involves keeping
some information in active, working memory; this information is likely to be the most recently presented stimuli.
Third, inhibition hampers memory. Words in a list tend to
interfere with one another. When they are at the begin-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

See also Free-recall learning.
Further Reading
Squire, Larry R. Memory and Brain. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989.

Sex differences
Physical and mental differences between men and
women.

The most basic question of sex differences is
whether the differences between the sexes are a result of
our sex chromosomes, and genetic in nature, or did humans learn them from our social and cultural environments? This argument, usually referred to as the naturenurture controversy, is one that is common in psychological work. Most psychologists attribute our differences to a combination of nature and nurture factors.
However, psychologists must be careful in their study of
sex differences. After all, men and women are much
more similar to each other than they are different. In the
past, too, many more apparent differences—either mental or physical—between the sexes were assumed to be
inherent before they were proven untrue.
There are many issues to consider when considering general differences between the men and women.
The modern study of sex differences can fuel stereotypes and lead to greater misunderstanding between the
sexes. Also, research is discussed in terms of statistics,
which does not speak of specific people. For instance,
some men may be very nurturing even though, as a
group, statistics show that men tend to be less nurturing
than women. Another issue is that animals, such as
mice and rats and even primates, are often used to study
biological sex differences, and this information does
not always translate to human beings. And lastly,
throughout history, psychological exploration, like
many of the sciences, has focused on male subjects and
male theorizing. While this work is important, there is a
great deal of work yet to be accomplished in studying
the psychology of women.
In the time of ancient Greece and Rome, many
philosophers theorized that women were incomplete
men. These theories seem to have influenced the early
psychologists as well. The functional psychologists of
the late 19th century, who put forth very academic stud-

ies of the sexes, made sweeping generalizations, such as
women are more nurturing because they have babies. In
part this information may have been true, but generalizations lead to stereotypes and stereotypes can be wrong
and mistaken as truth, which can aid in developing selffulfilling prophesies. For example, if it is widely believed, or stereotyped, that girls are not as good in math
as boys, then some girls might not even try to be good at
math, or teachers may not make the same effort to teach
math to girls.
In the beginning of the twentieth century, psychoanalytic psychology was studying psychosexual differences
and making connections between sexual organs and behaviors. By the mid-20th century, Abraham Maslow espoused a humanistic theory of personality which pointed to more similarity between the sexes than differences.
By the late 20th century, psychologists and medical scientists made even greater progress in the study of the
sexes through the work of sexology, endocrinology, neurophysiology, psychology, genetics, evolutionary theory,
and sociobiology. Today, sex differences and similarities
can be examined from many different aspects.

The biological process of sexual
differentiation
There is a genetic sex differentiation at conception.
Every human being starts out as 46 chromosomes
arranged in 23 pairs. Twenty-two of the pairs determine
hereditary characteristics, like eye color and disease potential, the 23rd pair are the sex chromosomes. This
chromosome alone is completely different in males and
females. If the chromosome pair is an “XX”, then the
embryo will be female, but if it is an “XY”, it will be
male. If there is a “Y” chromosome present, then the embryonic gonadal (sex glands) become a penis. If there is
no “Y” chromosome present, the human embryo is automatically female. In extremely rare cases, there are embryos that have different combinations of chromosomes,
which are called hermaphrodites because they are technically both sexes.
After the embryonic development of the sex glands,
hormones, which are powerful chemical substances, are
secreted into the blood stream and reach every cell of the
embryo. These hormones form a defined reproductive
tract in females and tell a male’s reproductive tract not to
form. The hormones also force the development of external genitalia (sex organs on the outside of the body). Finally, the hormones travel to the brain and cause differences between males and females to occur there. For example, in a female brain there are lifelong cycles or patterns of hormone release.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

577

Sex differences

ning or at the end of the list, they are not surrounded by
as many words that could interfere with them; words in
the middle, on the other hand, must compete for space in
working memory with more words around them.

Sexism

The social process of sexual differentiation
Biological organisms are modified once they are
born. Every individual is born into an existing social
context, so if it is time on the planet when females are,
according to the social structure, supposed to be nurturing, then girls will be taught to be that way from a very
early age. Behavior that fits that structure will be rewarded and reinforced, and behavior that goes against that
norm will be discouraged. Throughout human history
opposing principles have been ascribed male/female labels. The sun, for instance, has been thought of as male
energy, while the more passive moon is seen as female.
Mythology has reinforced human behavior, because people make up mythology. Likewise, if most literature is
written by males and those males portray women in a
certain way, such as being content with less political
power, then the literature is reinforcing that stereotype.
Most sex differences are a combination of biological and social processes. Differences in ability, for instance, do seem to exist according to research. Men
tend to be physically larger and more muscular than
women, while women have proven to be constitutionally stronger, that is, less prone to certain diseases and
having longer life spans. Men perform better on some
cognitive tests, like visualizing 3D objects. Women
tend to have greater verbal abilities. These differences
are biological, but are accentuated by cultural environmental influences. Differences in achievement studies
show that there is not a great difference in motivation,
but motivation is activated under different conditions
for males and females. These differences are socially
reinforced. In looking at differences in aggression
(nonaccidental behavior that causes harm), studies repeatedly show that men are more aggressive than
women. This may be due to evolutionary processes. If
women were busy having babies and nursing babies,
then men had to go and hunt and ward off enemies,
forcing men into a more aggressive role. It is possible
that this information has come down genetically to
modern men. Yet, studies also show that learning by example is one way that behavior evolves. If a father is
physically aggressive with his family, sons tend to be
that way also. In addition to evolutional and learned behaviors, there are physiological reasons, such as hormones and brain design, which can account for greater
levels of aggression found in men.
There are many factors that account for our differences, and there are many similarities among us, too. In
exploring sex differences, it is important to look at the
questions from many angles.
Lara Lynn Lane
578

Further Reading
Solheim, Bruce Olav. On top of the world. Westport, CT:
Greenwood Press, 2000.
Classen, Constance. The color of angels. London: Routledge,
1998.
Lips, Hilary M., and Nina Lee Colwill. The psychology of sex differences. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1978.
Christen, Yves. Trans. by Nicholas Davidson. Sex differences:
modern biology and the unisex fallacy. New Brunswick,
USA. and London: Transaction Publishers, 1991.
Sayers, Janet. Sexual contradictions: psychology, psychoanalysis, and feminism. London and New York: Tavistock Publications, 1986.
Wright, Elizabeth, ed. Feminism and psychoanalysis: a critical
dictionary. Oxford, England and Cambridge, MA: Basil
Blackwell, Ltd., 1992.

Sexism
See Gender bias

Sex roles
Sets of attributes, including attitudes, personality
traits, abilities, interests, and behaviors that are defined as appropriate for each sex.

Men and women are different not only in anatomy,
but also in terms of how they behave and in the interests
they express. Certain behavioral differences are believed
to be biologically determined. For example, the male sex
hormone testosterone is believed to be the reason why
males are considered more aggressive than females.
However, many nonanatomical differences appear to be
based on sex roles that are learned by every individual.
In other words, people are born male or female but are
taught how to be masculine or feminine.
Roles are sets of norms that define how people in a
given social position ought to behave. For example, people who have a particular occupation are subjected to a
set of expectations concerning the work performed and
the style in which it is accomplished. While one might
anticipate a mechanic’s soiled appearance, such an appearance would be considered unsanitary and unprofessional for a dentist. In contrast to specific roles based on
occupations (e.g., teacher, firefighter) or family relationships (e.g., mother, son), sex roles are diffuse because
they pertain to virtually all people and apply to all parts
of one’s daily life. It is therefore important to understand

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Sex roles
A little girl practices a typically feminine sex role, caring for an infant. (Vanessa Vick. Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with
permission.)

how each of us learns his or her own sex role and the significance it has on our daily lives.
A sex-role concept is a set of shared expectations
that people hold about the characteristics suitable for individuals on the basis of their gender. The notion of these
roles being shared implies that most people endorse the
expected behaviors as appropriate for men and for
women. We all have beliefs about what males or females
do and are supposed to do. In your family, whose job is it
to send greeting cards to friends, buy gifts, remember a
niece’s birthday, organize parties, prepare food, and keep
in touch with extended family members? You are probably thinking of a woman because the above activities are
considered part of the woman’s role in most cultures.
There is no direct relationship between biological
sex and the various social aspects of sex roles. Accordingly, some psychologists have recommended that the
term sex be used to designate biological maleness/femaleness as opposed to the term gender role, which
refers to basic notions of masculinity and femininity.
Much of what we consider masculine and feminine is
learned as a result of socialization experiences. It is not
a biological necessity that women tend to be the ones

who remember birthdays and send greeting cards. Rather
it is simply a cultural expectation that gets passed on
from generation to generation.

Sex-role stereotypes
Sex-role beliefs become sex-role stereotypes when
individuals employ those sets of behaviors as rules to be
applied to all males and females. In western society, for
example, women have traditionally been regarded as
more delicate and compassionate than men. Stereotypes
for femininity include expectations to be domestic,
warm, pretty, emotional, dependent, physically weak,
and passive. By contrast, men are thought of as being
more competitive and less emotional than women. Masculinity stereotypes can be described by words such as
unemotional, physically strong, independent, active, and
aggressive. These implicit or explicit expectations are
taught from a very early age. For instance, it is not uncommon to see family and friends play more roughly
with baby boys than with baby girls. In terms of career
expectations, until fairly recently women have traditionally been associated with homemaking and a relatively

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

579

Sex roles

narrow range of occupations such as nursing or teaching,
while men have been expected to hold a wide variety of
jobs outside the home in business, politics, and industry.
Although certain common beliefs regarding the way
each sex should behave are present across societies, substantial variations exist between cultures when examining sex roles and their accompanying stereotypes. For
example, after studying the behaviors of men and
women in three cultures in New Guinea, Margaret
Mead found that each culture had its own sex roles and
stereotypes. Interestingly, few of them corresponded to
the stereotypes expressed in industrialized nations. This
finding provides some support for sex roles as cultural
constructions. The diverse characteristics associated with
sex roles are not biologically determined, but rather culturally transmitted.
Stereotyping itself is a normal cognitive process. In
fact, this act of forming general impressions is of great
help in allowing us to categorize the tremendous amount
of information we continually experience. However, the
excessive use of masculine and feminine labels can place
undue restrictions on people’s behaviors and attitudes.
Certain beliefs about sex-appropriate behaviors can determine the types of experiences to which we are exposed during the course of our lifetime. For example,
some grade school teachers may form quick assumptions
about a student’s scholastic abilities largely on the basis
his or her sex. As a result, a boy may be encouraged in
math class while little effort is given to refining his talent
for writing poetry. At more advanced levels, males may
be more encouraged than females to enroll in mathematics, science, and engineering courses.

Sex-role socialization
From infancy to adulthood, people receive informal
but potent impressions of the role they are expected to
play in society. As infants, little girls may be cuddled and
handled in a more delicate manner than little boys. As
children mature, family members continue to cultivate
masculinity and femininity by encouraging a child to act
in ways and develop interests the family members feel are
appropriate for the child’s sex, while at the same time discouraging any conduct considered inappropriate. For example, parents may reward a daughter’s interest in sewing
and housekeeping with praise and encouragement while
actively discouraging a son who shows similar interest.
Once a child is of school age, his or her peers generally
provide additional information about what is considered
acceptable or unacceptable within one’s own sex role.
In the 1960s, social learning theorists such as Walter
Mischel and Albert Bandura emphasized the role of
both direct reinforcement and modeling in shaping
580

children’s sex-role behavior and attitudes. Boys and girls
learn new sex roles by observing and imitating their parents or some other person important to them of the same
sex. For instance, little girls copy their mother’s grooming activities by putting on makeup and dressing up in
her jewelry while young boys imitate their father’s behaviors by pretending to shave or work in the garage.
Furthermore, parents seem to reinforce sex-typed activities in their children by either rewarding (e.g., a smile or
laughter) their son for playing with trucks and their
daughter for playing with dolls. They may also respond
negatively (e.g., a frown or removal of the toy) when the
form of play does not meet sex-role expectations. Another explanation for sex-role development is found in a
cognitive developmental theory proposed by Lawrence
Kohlberg. It is based on the view that children play an
active role in the reinforcement of appropriate sex roles.
Once children become aware of their gender label, they
come to value behaviors, objects, and attitudes associated with their sex. Each child becomes highly motivated
to learn about how members of his or her own sex act
and then behaves in the way that is considered appropriate for that gender.
Sex-role development has been an area of extensive
research over the past several decades. The first step in
this process consists of acquiring gender identity. This
is the point at which the child is able to label herself or
himself accurately and can categorize others appropriately as male or female. For example, a two-year old child
who is shown pictures of a same-sex child and an opposite sex child and is asked “which one is you?” will correctly choose the same-sex picture. By age four, most
children understand that they will remain the same sex
throughout their life, a concept known as gender stability. A child’s ability to recognize that someone remains
male or female despite a change of clothing or altered
hair length demonstrates the development of true gender
constancy that is not typically achieved until about the
age of five or six.
Since the 1960s, sex roles in North America have
become increasingly flexible. Whereas “masculinity”
and “femininity” had long been considered to be opposite ends of the same continuum, (meaning a person
could be one or the other but not both), psychologists
today conceive of masculinity and femininity as two separate dimensions. Therefore, a person can be both compassionate and independent, both gentle and assertive.
Many people no longer regard fearfulness or tenderness
as unmanly emotions nor is it considered unfeminine if a
woman is assertive. Men and women can also hold jobs
that were once considered inappropriate for their sex.
For instance, most women work outside their homes and
are, in increasing numbers, entering professions tradi-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Timothy Moore
Further Reading
Jacobs, J. A., ed. Gender inequality at work. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage, 1995.
Leaper, D., ed. Childhood gender segregation: Causes and
consequences. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1994.
Macoby, E. The two sexes: Growing up apart, coming together
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1998.

Sex therapies
Various psychological treatments for the correction
of sexual dysfunction which cannot be identified
by a biological inadequacy.

Changing attitudes towards sex
Sex therapy, the treatment of sexual disorders, has
evolved from early studies on sexual behavior made over
50 years ago. During these 50 years, the approach to sex
therapy has changed immensely. When William Masters and Virginia Johnson published Human Sexual Inadequacy in 1970, the sexual revolution, born in the
1960s, was not yet in full force. Due in part to the development of the oral contraceptive known as “the pill” and
the rise in the politics of feminism, society began to take
a different, more open view of sexuality. For many, the
sexual morals of the Victorian age and strict religious
backgrounds had lingered even into the years after World
War II. Traditionally, women were afraid to admit an interest in or even pleasure from sex. Men were permitted
even less freedom to discuss sexual problems such as impotence. The rise in sex therapy addressed those issues
as they had never been addressed before, in the privacy
of a doctor’s office.
In addition to shifting attitudes about sex, developments in medicine allowed more people to experience a
satisfying sex life. By the 1990s, medications were developed that addressed the biological nature of sexual
dysfunctions. Before these developments, if a man or a
woman had trouble functioning sexually, the cause was
often considered merely “psychological” and not a medical matter. Such medical treatments as penile implants,
the prescription drug Viagra, and surgery or hormone replacement therapy for women can now be used to solve
sexual disorders. If medical treatment does not solve a
patient’s disorder, sexual pleasure becomes a key issue
for therapists.

Masters and Johnson out, postmoderns in
Masters and Johnson were pioneers in sex therapy.
Their research focused on three basic ideas: first, on encouraging couples to engage in completely new experiences; second, on persuading couples to perform in a previously prohibitive way that would hopefully dissolve their
sexual conflicts; and third, on allowing couples to openly
discuss such taboo subjects as premature ejaculation. By
the 1990s, however, other researchers began noting that
this form of therapy was not as useful with the coming of
what is termed the “postmodern” age. In this new era, a
different approach to sex therapy was deemed necessary.
Love and intimacy in the postmodern era affords the
luxury of modern medicine and biology. Once medical
factors are ruled out, a more ominous issue arises, that of
desire disorders. Postmodern sex therapies consider
many complex problems when approaching sexual dysfunction. According to current research, sexual disorders
might have a host of underlying causes. These causes
might even make sexual dysfunction desirable to the person suffering from such problems. For example, if a couple is having problems with intimacy, trust, or control in
their relationship, creating sexual problems might be a
way of avoiding dealing directly with the real issues.
Low self-esteem, unresolved family or parental conflicts, or using energy for performance at work instead of
for sex are all examples of problems that a couple must
address before any promising sex therapy can begin.

Benefits
If medical issues have been ruled out, once a person
resolves whatever problem is causing a difficulty with
intimacy, loving sexual relationships will be able to proceed. In an age of mobility with computers and email
replacing interpersonal contact, avoiding intimacy is
rather easy. Such technological “advances” as relying
on automatic teller machines to hand out money, using
computer keyboards to order products and services, and
even machines to check out groceries all eliminate the
opportunity for conversation or to release tension
through personal contact. When people are allowed, or
even expected, to become self-absorbed, sexual desire
becomes even less necessary. In this age of over-achievers and cyberspace millionaires, living a life of all work
and no play is considered a virtue. With so many issues
at hand, a qualified sex therapist is often needed to help
a person reach to the core of his or her problems. Most
experts agree, sex therapies that address people and
their personal histories, and not only problems that are
manifested at the time of therapy, are those that have the
best chance for success.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Jane Spear
581

Sex therapies

tionally considered to be almost exclusively male occupations such as medicine, engineering, and politics.

Sexual abuse

Further Reading
Gochros, Harvey L. Sexual Distress. The Encyclopedia of Social Work, 19th edition. Edwards, Richard L., Ed.-inChief. Washington, D.C.: NASW Press, 1995.
Hight, T. L. Sex Therapy. The Baker Encyclopedia of Psychology. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker Books, 1999.
Packer, Jennifer. Get Rid of the Fears That Keep You from True
Intimacy. Knight Ridder/Tribune, The Dallas Morning
News, June 6, 2000.

Further Information
American Psychological Association. 750 First Street, N.E.,
Washington, D.C., USA. 20002-4242, 202-336-5500,
800-374-2721.

Sexual abuse

Victims of sexual abuse often feel guilty and believe
that they are at fault for the abuse. Sexual assault on an
adult often involves violence or the threat of violence.
Although violence may be involved in the sexual abuse
of children, most often the coercion is based upon the inherent power that the adult has over the child. An infant
or very young child has no defense against an abuser. Although an older child may be bribed or threatened, the
child usually has been taught to acquiesce to adult demands. The abuser usually insists that the child keep
“their secret,” and the shame and guilt felt by the child
reinforces the need for secrecy.

Historical perspectives

Any sexual act or sexual exposure that is not consensual or that occurs between a child and an
older individual.

Sexual abuse includes any sexual act or experience
which is forced upon a person or which occurs as a result
of coercion. In general, any sexual experience or exposure that occurs between a child and an older child, an
adolescent, or an adult, for the gratification of the older
individual, is considered to be sexual abuse. Sexual
abuse includes rape, incest, inappropriate touching, exhibitionism, and physical or verbal harassment. Exposing children to pornographic material or using children
in the production of pornography also constitutes sexual abuse.
Since many or even most cases of sexual abuse are
not reported to the authorities, it has been difficult to determine the extent of sexual abuse in our society. The
victims of sexual abuse can be males or females of any
age, from infants to the elderly. The perpetrators of sexual abuse are predominantly male, but include some females, and come from all socioeconomic classes and
racial and ethnic groups. They may be educated professionals, working people, or unemployed. They may or
may not be under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
Many abusers were themselves abused as children. Although the abuser may be a stranger to the victim, most
often it is a family member, friend or acquaintance, or a
caregiver. In recent years, an increased public awareness
of sexual abuse has resulted in more abuse reports and
prosecutions, as well as increasing the development of
recovery programs for victims and treatment programs
for abusers. Furthermore, there have been major initiatives aimed at preventing the sexual abuse of both children and adults. Unfortunately, in a few cases this
heightened awareness of the problem of sexual abuse has
582

resulted in false accusations, overzealous prosecution of
innocent people, or manipulation of victims by unqualified therapists.

The definition of sexual abuse varies among cultures
and has changed over time. Feminist movements have
promoted broader definitions of what constitutes sexual
abuse. Although most societies view sex between children
and adults as inappropriate, mores concerning appropriate
ages and age differences for sexual partners vary. Even
today, there are individuals and organizations that promote
sex between children and adults and argue for the elimination of laws against incest and statutory rape.
The early work of psychoanalyst Sigmund Freud
suggested that, for many of his patients, repressed memories of childhood incest lay at the root of neuroses.
However, many of Freud’s colleagues argued that the
early sexual encounters described by patients in psychoanalysis were actually memories of childhood sexual
fantasies. Freud himself later adopted this position, although his colleague, Sandor Ferenczi, confirmed the involvement of childhood sexual abuse in many psychological disorders. As a result of Freud’s influence, reports of sexual abuse often were discounted as the products of a child’s imagination. When the evidence of
abuse was undeniable, the child was viewed as having allowed or encouraged the abuse. To some extent, these attitudes survive today.
In the 1940s and 1950s, Alfred Kinsey and his
coworkers first documented the extent of childhood sexual abuse. However, they did not view these early sexual
experiences as particularly significant. It was not until
the women’s movement of the 1970s that the extent and
significance of sexual abuse began to be appreciated.

Immediate effects of sexual abuse
The victim’s initial response to sexual abuse is usually horror and disbelief. This may be followed by a false

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

begin to recover these memories. However, in a few
cases, overzealous counselors and therapists have elicited
memories of childhood sexual abuse from patients who
apparently were never abused. In the popular press, this
has become known as “false memory syndrome.”

Following the experience, the victim of sexual abuse
may be confused, frightened, furious, resentful, and depressed. These emotions can continue for a very long
time. Child victims may become withdrawn, may regress
to earlier developmental stages, or may display precocious sexualized behavior. Non-abusive parents of
abused children, as well as the innocent partners of adult
victims, may experience many of these same emotions.
This is called “secondary victimization.”

Once the abuse is recognized, the victim may try to
excuse it, rationalize it, or minimize it by suggesting that
it was not really significant. Eventually, recovering victims come to accept that the abuse had major consequences in their lives and that it was not their fault. The
later stages of recovery include anger, sadness, and finally, acceptance. Many law enforcement agencies provide
support services to victims of sexual abuse. Trained therapists and self-help groups, including 12-step programs,
may be indispensable for the recovery process. Individuals who have recovered from the effects of sexual abuse
often are referred to as survivors.

Many victims of sexual abuse blame themselves.
They may be overwhelmed by guilt and shame. Some
victims repress all memories of the experience or rationalize it in a way that makes it seem insignificant.

The sexual offender
Long-term effects of sexual abuse
Victims of sexual abuse may develop many of the
symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorders. For children, the guilt, fear, shame, and anger brought on by
sexual abuse, if untreated, can last into adulthood. Longterm effects of sexual abuse can include chronic anxiety,
low self-esteem, and problems with intimacy and sexuality. Victims may become severely depressed, even suicidal, or develop psychotic symptoms. They may suffer
from alcohol or drug abuse or eating disorders. Many
victims experience marital and family difficulties. In severe cases, a victim’s efforts to dissociate from the experience can lead to the development of multiple personality disorder.
Many factors influence the effects of sexual abuse
on the victim. These include the type of abuse, the age of
the victim, the frequency of abuse, and the relationship
of the victim to the abuser. Children who are victimized
by a trusted adult experience the betrayal of this trust.
Victims who obtain support from family, friends, and
trained professionals following the abuse are less likely
to experience long-term effects. In general, abused children who have been coerced into maintaining secrecy
suffer from the most serious long-term effects.

Recovery from sexual abuse
Recovery from sexual abuse occurs in recognizable
stages. These stages are analogous to those of the grieving or mourning process. Often, the first stage is a denial,
which may involve the suppression or even total repression of memories of the abuse. In therapy or self-help
groups, adults who were sexually abused as children may

Many sexual offenders abuse multiple victims. The
perpetrators of sexual abuse are usually angry individuals who are driven by a need to dominate or control others. They may be psychotic or have personality disorders. Some sexual abuse is perpetrated by pedophiles
who are sexually attracted to prepubescent children.
Other sexual abuse appears to be situational. For example, incest may occur only when the parent is intoxicated
or under stress.
Most sexual offenders deny that the abuse occurred.
If they do admit to it, they usually blame it on the victim
or the circumstances. They also may blame alcohol or
drugs. A limited number of treatment programs are available for sexual offenders, both inside and outside of prisons. Recidivism is usually high for chronic sexual abusers.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Adams, Caren, and Jennifer Fay. No More Secrets: Protecting
Your Child from Sexual Assault. San Luis Obispo, CA:
Impact Publishers, 1981.
Adams, Caren, and Jennifer Fay. Helping Your Child Recover
from Sexual Abuse. Seattle: University of Washington
Press, 1992.
Bass, Ellen, and Laura Davis. The Courage to Heal: A Guide
for Women Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse. 3rd ed. New
York: HarperPerennial, 1994.
Bass, Ellen, and Louise Thornton, eds. I Never Told Anyone:
Writings by Women Survivors of Child Sexual Abuse. New
York: HarperPerennial, 1991.
Hagans, Kathryn B., and Joyce Case. When Your Child Has
Been Molested: A Parent’s Guide to Healing and Recovery. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1988.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

583

Sexual abuse

sense of calm, brought on by fear. Many victims report
that they mentally leave their bodies, to dissociate themselves from the physical event. This passivity may be misinterpreted as consent by both the abuser and the victim.
Sexual abuse may or may not result in physical injury.

Sexual deviations

Hunter, Mic. Abused Boys: The Neglected Victims of Sexual
Abuse. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1990.
Pendergrast, Mark. “Daughters Lost.” In Fathering Daughters:
Reflections by Men, edited by DeWitt Henry and James
Alan McPherson. Boston: Beacon Press, 1998.
Westerlund, Elaine. Women’s Sexuality After Childhood Incest.
New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1992.

Further Information
National Coalition Against Sexual Assault. 125 N. Enola Drive,
Enola, PA, USA. 17025, fax: 717-728-9781, 717-728-9764.
Email: ncasa@redrose.net. http://ncasa.org/main.html.

Sexual deviations
See Paraphilias

Sexual dysfunction
The persistent or recurrent inability or lack of desire
to perform sexually or engage in sexual activity.

Sexual dysfunction involves both somatic and psychic phenomena which contribute to an overall inability
or lack of interest in performing sexually. In males, the
condition is most associated with erectile dysfunction
(ED), formerly referred to as male “impotence.” Studies
estimate that 10-20 million American males have some
degree of ED, which clinically presents as a persistent
inability to attain or maintain penile erection sufficient
for sexual intercourse.
Female sexual dysfunction falls into four main categories: (1) a low libido or aversion to sex; (2) difficulty
in attaining sexual arousal; (3) inability to experience or
attain orgasm; and (4) pain during sexual intercourse.
Research in this area indicates that as many as 4 in 10
American women experience some form of sexual dysfunction.

Assessment
As recently as the mid-twentieth century, sexual dysfunction was considered a psychological condition or disorder. The Kinsey Reports and Masters and Johnson’s
studies tended to isolate “performance anxiety” as the root
of most sexual disorders. Later, in the 1970s, Helen Singer
Kaplan impressed many colleagues and practitioners with
her focus on enhancing sexual desire rather than sexual
performance. Her biological approach to sexuality, i.e.,
equating sexual desire with physical appetite, was indeed
584

helpful in sex therapy. Her approach was further justified
by the fact that epidemiological studies during the 1980s
showed a disproportionate incidence of treatment-resistant
desire disorders in the sex-therapy clinical populations of
the United States and Northern Europe. It is clear that the
proliferation of erotic material available to the general
public (pornographic publications, movies, videos, sex
toys, Internet sites, etc.) from the 1970s to the 1990s paralleled the therapeutic effort to enhance sexual desire
rather than treat sexual performance.
However, by the 1990s, human sexuality was emerging as a complex bio-psychosocial phenomenon. Contemporary studies view the great majority of sexual dysfunction cases as having somatic or organic rather than
psychologic etiologies, or at least as being “comorbid” in
origin. This is particularly true in male disorders, where
up to 80 percent of ED is the result of physical conditions
which interfere with nerves and blood vessels. Most commonly, vascular disease is blamed for decreased blood
flow to the penis. Once a physical condition affects the
ability to maintain penile erection, psychological distress
and performance anxiety sets in, complicating the problem. This leads to avoidance of sexual activity and the
male may become socially withdrawn or depressed.
It is generally believed that for women, more so than
for men, sexual drives and satisfactions are more complex
and organized around the entire sexual relationship or sexual partner. Moreover, collateral factors such as birth control, abortion, fear of sexually-transmitted diseases, and
feminism have greatly affected womens’ general approach
to sexual activity and sexual behavior. Key psychological
causes associated with sexual dysfunction range from past
sexual abuse, to unsatisfactory emotional relationships
with sexual partners, to poor self-assessment regarding
body image or appearance. Another factor to be considered is that half of all women over the age of 60 are without a partner (even though they have forestalled
menopause with hormone replacement therapy), and the
“use it or lose it” thinking about sexual activity has proven
to have some medical basis. (Research suggests that long
periods of sexual inactivity may result in loss of elasticity
to the vagina in females, and muscle atrophy in the penis
of males.) All of these factors may put pressure on both
sexes to “perform” or engage in sexual activity more
often, even if sexual intercourse results in physical pain.
Thus, “remedicalization” of dysfunction from the psychological to the medical arena may not always address the
coexisting psychosocial aspects of the condition. Adjunct
psychological therapy may be warranted.

Treatment
The recent emphasis on physical rather than psychological etiology in addressing sexual dysfunction corre-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

For women, treatment of sexual dysfunction has
been more varied because of the varying causes and presenting symptoms. During 1999, studies were commenced to test the efficacy of Viagra on females who
complained of low sexual desire or inability to become
sexually aroused. However, initial results published in
May 2000 indicated that Viagra proved no more effective
than a placebo in the female group. This finding may
further support the belief that a synergy between the
mind and body provides the best relief for female sexual
dysfunction.
Notwithstanding, for both genders, several physical
conditions greatly affect sexual functioning. These include diabetes, obesity, vascular disease, stress, fatigue,
and untoward affects of medication. Menopausal and
post-menopausal women may experience pain with sexual intercourse caused by decreased lubrication of mucous membranes and tissues. In all of the above, treatment of the underlying medical condition may render the
sexual dysfunction as nonexistent or effectively relieved.

Further Reading
”FDA Approves First Device to Aid Female Version of Impotence.” Jet, (May 22, 2000): 33.
”It Takes Two: Coping With Erectile Dysfunction.” Harvard
Womens Health Watch, (March 2000): 2.
Dosa, Laszlo. “Careful History Essential in All Patients With
ED.” Urology Times, (May 2000): 19.
Kring, Brunhild. “Psychotherapy of Sexual Dysfunction.”
American Journal of Psychotherapy, (Winter 2000): 97.
Leland, John, Kalb, Claudia, and Nadine Joseph. “The Science
of Women and Sex.” Newsweek, (May 29, 2000): 48.
Miller, TA. “Diagnostic Evaluation of Erectile Dysfunction.”
American Family Physician, (January 2000): 95.
Henderson, C.W. “Lahey Clinic to Study Effects of Viagra on
Women.” Women’s Health Weekly, (April 1, 2000): 27.

Sexuality
The full range of thoughts and actions that describe
sexual motivation and behavior.

While sex is not necessary for an individual’s survival, without it a species would cease to exist. The determinants of sexual motivation and behavior include an
individual’s physiology, learned behavior, the physical
environment, and the social environment.

Finally, in treating sexual dysfunction, clients and
couples are encouraged to refrain from thinking of sexual intercourse as the only or the ultimate goal of sexual
activity. Therapists advise couples to frequently engage
in non-coital sexual activity, including oral and manual
stimulation, and to continue to provide such sexual pleasure even if the male loses his erection. Further, couples
are encouraged to make sexual activity a priority and not
an incidental happening when they retire at night. This is
because testosterone levels are in fact lower in the
evening hours, and both persons may be tired. Added to
this is the fact that with age, it takes both sexes longer to
become sexually stimulated. Partners should also try to
incorporate sensual and affectional feelings into their activities, for obvious benefit.

A person’s sex is determined at conception by
whether one out of the 23 chromosomes in the father’s
sperm is either X (female) or Y (male). All female eggs
contain an X chromosome, so each fertilized egg, or embryo, has a genotype of either XX (female) or XY
(male). Reproductive hormones produced by the gonads
(male testes and female ovaries) determine the development of the reproductive organs and the fetal brain, especially the hypothalamus. All the human reproductive
hormones are found in both sexes but in different
amounts. The principal female hormones are estrogens
and progesterone (of which the main ones are estradiol
and progesterone); the primarily male hormones are androgens (mainly testosterone). In males, levels of testosterone remain fairly constant, regulated by a feedback
loop to the brain and pituitary gland, which control hormone secretion. In females, hormone levels fluctuate
within each menstrual cycle, rising at ovulation. Reproductive hormones have two types of effects on the body.
Organizational effects, which occur primarily before
birth, are irreversible and permanently govern an individual’s response to further hormone secretion. Activational effects govern behavior temporarily while hormone levels are elevated.

Lauri R. Harding

Human females are born with about 400,000 immature eggs. Each one is contained in a sac called a

Some studies have shown that a decrease in dietary
minerals, particularly zinc, may adversely affect libido.
Such dietary deficits are related to pituitary hormone
production of prolactin, which, at high levels, contributes
to sexual dysfunction. It is therefore believed that some
persons may be helped by increasing their dietary intake
of red meats, dark meat poultry, seafood, leafy greens,
and whole grains (all rich in zinc).

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

585

Sexuality

lates with the widespread success of prescription and
non-prescription drug therapy for ED, such as that
found in Viagra (sildenafil citrate), which effectively increases blood flow to the genitals. By 2000, doctors increasingly considered therapeutic doses of testosterone
to both male and female patients, as testosterone is
known to enhance sexual libido in both sexes.

Sexuality

follicle. When a girl reaches puberty, one or more
eggs mature every month, stimulated by the release of
a hormone from the pituitary gland. As the egg matures, it secretes the hormone estrogen, causing the
uterine lining to thicken in anticipation of the implantation of a fertilized egg. This is followed by ovulation, as the follicle ruptures, releasing the mature egg
which travels through the fallopian tube towards the
uterus. If the egg is not fertilized by sperm, it disintegrates and the uterine lining leaves the body, a process
called menstruation. Women remain fertile until
menopause, which normally occurs around the age of
fifty. Unlike the production of female eggs, the male
production of sperm is not cyclical and men remain
fertile throughout their lives, although they may produce fewer sperm as they age. A man produces several
billion sperm each year, releasing 300 to 500 million
sperm in an average ejaculation.
Unlike that of other species, human sexual behavior
is not bound to the female reproductive cycle. Women
may engage in or refrain from sexual intercourse at any
time during the cycle. Some women have reported increased sexual interest at the time of ovulation, others
around the time of menstruation, and still others experience no link at all between their sexual behavior and
menstrual cycle. After their initial organizational effects
at birth, hormone levels stay low until puberty when activational effects first begin, triggering the reproductive
system and generating an interest in sexual behavior.
Whether or not sexual activity actually occurs at this
point, however, depends on the interaction of physical
readiness, social skills, and opportunity. For adults, as
for adolescents, sexuality is not governed solely by hormones but also by a repertoire of learned attitudes and
behaviors. This learning begins in childhood with the
development of gender roles and continues throughout
the life span, and it depends on attitudes prevalent in a
culture at a given time.
The laboratory research conducted by William
Masters and Virginia Johnson in the 1950s and 1960s
yielded important information about the human cycle
of sexual response. This cycle has four phases for both
men and women: initial excitement, a plateau stage, orgasm, and resolution, during which the person returns
to a state of relaxation. Males experience a refractory
period after orgasm during which they are temporarily
insensitive to sexual stimulation.
The same combination of physical, psychological,
and social factors that govern sexuality may contribute
to sexual dysfunction, any condition that inhibits the
desire for, or ability to have, satisfying sexual experiences. In males, the most common dysfunction is impotence, or the inability to have or maintain an erection
586

sufficient for intercourse. While impotence can have
physical origins, including fatigue, diabetes, alcoholism, and the side effects of certain medications, it is
usually psychological in nature. In females, a common
sexual dysfunction is the inability to reach orgasm, also
called arousal disorder, which is also associated with
such psychological factors as self-consciousness, lack
of self-confidence, depression, and dissatisfaction with
the nature of the romantic relationship itself.
Although human sexual activity is primarily heterosexual, between 5 and 10 percent of males and 2 to 6
percent of females in the United States are homosexuals, individuals in whom sexual attraction and behavior
are directed at members of their own sex. (Persons
whose sexual behavior is directed at members of both
sexes are known as bisexuals.) Researchers have found
evidence of both biological and environmental origins
of homosexuality. While no significant differences
have been found in the levels of hormones that circulate
in the blood of homosexuals and heterosexuals, exposure to high levels of certain reproductive hormones
during fetal development has been linked to homosexuality. In addition, anatomical differences have been
found between the hypothalamus of heterosexual and
homosexual men, and studies of twins have found distinct evidence of a hereditary component to homosexuality. Environmental influences include early family relationships and the modeling of behaviors observed in
the parent of the opposite sex, as well as social learning
throughout the life span.
Sexual preference—the gender to which one is attracted—is only one aspect of human sexual orientation.
Also involved is gender role, a general pattern of masculine or feminine behaviors that is strongly influenced by
cultural factors. Distinct from this is sex identity, referring to whether individuals consider themselves to be
male or female. Transsexualism, a condition in which a
person believes he or she is of the wrong sex, occurs in
approximately one in 20,000 in men and one in 50,000
in women. Today, these individuals have the option of a
sex change operation that allows them to live as a member of the sex with which they identify.
See also Gender Identity Disorder; Heterosexuality.
Further Reading
Fisher, Seymour. Sexual Images of the Self: The Psychology of
Erotic Sensations and Illusions. Hillsdale, NJ: L. Erlbaum
Associates, 1989.
Levand, Rhonda. Sexual Evolution. Berkeley, CA: Celestial
Arts, 1991.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

1901-1981
American psychologist who conducted groundbreaking studies on schizophrenia.

In a career that spanned nearly 50 years, David
Shakow conducted research that led to a vastly improved
understanding of schizophrenia, one of the most complex mental disorders. Shakow’s research covered all aspects of the disease, but in particular he focused on the
mental deterioration that accompanied its progression.
He was a strong advocate for patients of schizophrenia,
which helped lessen the stigma that so often accompanies them.

During his years at Worcester, Shakow began one
of the nation’s first clinical psychology internship programs. He also continued his work on his doctoral dissertation, the focus of which he had shifted as a result
of his research on schizophrenia. In 1946, the completed dissertation, The Nature of Deterioration in Schizophrenia was not only accepted enthusiastically, it was
also recognized as a classic study on the psychology of
the disease.

Shakow was born on January 2, 1901 in New York
City. Growing up in the lower east side of New York,
which he later described as a “most auspicious place to
have one’s beginnings” because of the strength of the
community, was an important influence on him.

Shakow also chaired a committee of the American
Psychiatric Association charged with defining the standards of education and training of the developing field
of clinical psychology. Results of the committee report
set the agenda for the famous Boulder Conference of
1949 that defined clinical psychology as a
scientist/practitioner model.

Begins clinical work at Worcester
Shakow went on to Harvard, where he received both
his bachelors’ and master’s degrees in science. He embarked upon a doctorate in psychology, but his dissertation research progressed more slowly than he had anticipated. He was married, and he and his wife Sophie had
begun their family. Shakow decided that to support his
family he needed to take a more practical career approach over the short term, and he accepted a position at
the nearby Worcester State Hospital in 1932. It was at
Worcester that he began his research into schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia is not a “split personality” disorder
as many people mistakenly believed at that time.
Rather, it is a disease in which symptoms can range
from mild confusion to violent self-destructive outbursts. Those who sufferer from the disease often show
marked deterioration in their ability to function normally, frequently becoming less aware of their condition. (One of the common difficulties associated with
schizophrenic patients is their refusal to take medication to control their symptoms.)
What Shakow tried to ascertain through his research was how much of the loss of normal function
was the result of deterioration (which is reversible) and
deficit (which is not). Among his findings, true deterioration in the schizophrenic occurs at a basic, reflexive
level, while deficit occurs at the cognitive and perceptual levels.

Continues research at NIMH
Shakow left Worcester that same year, heading to
the University of Illinois Medical School as a professor
in the psychiatry department. He was named a professor
of psychology at the University of Chicago two years
later; he held both positions concurrently. After a few
years of teaching, Shakow decided that he wanted to devote more time to research and accepted an appointment
to the National Institute of Mental Health in 1954. There,
he served as the first head of the Laboratory of Psychology in NIMH’s Intramural Research Program.
Under Shakow’s 12-year tenure, the laboratory developed special sections to study not only schizophrenia,
but also perception, aging, childhood development, and
personality. The laboratory published more than 500 articles highlighting its research during those years.
Shakow retired from his position in 1966 but stayed on
as senior research psychologist. During the 1970s he and
his staff continued to do important research on schizophrenia. During these years he was awarded both the
Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award and the
Distinguished Professional Contribution Award of the
American Psychological Association.
Shakow continued his work at NIMH, conducting research, writing articles, and working on his scientific
memoirs. In late February 1981, he suffered a heart attack
while at work and died a few days later on February 26.

Shakow entered the world of psychology at a time
when the mentally ill were considered dangerous and unGALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

George A. Milite
587

David Shakow

David Shakow

treatable. Through his work with patients, Shakow made
clear that, whatever their condition, they were still
human beings and needed to be treated compassionately.
He put forth the idea that patients should be allowed to
serve as “partners” in those studies in which they participated, not merely experimental subjects.

Shaping

Further Reading
Garmezy, Norman, and Philip S. Holzman. “David Shakow.”
American Psychologist. June 1984, pp. 698-699.
Shakow, David. Clinical psychology as a science and profession: a forty-year odyssey. Chicago: Aldine Publishing
Co., 1969.
Shakow, David. Schizophrenia: selected papers. New York: International Universities Press, 1977.

motivating a child to succeed, actually create nothing
more than a craving for further rewards.
Zoran Minderovic
Further Reading
Nye, Robert D. The Legacy of B.F. Skinner: Concepts and Perspectives, Controversies and Misunderstandings. Pacific
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1992.

Shaping
A gradual, behavior modification technique in
which successive approximations to the desired
behavior is rewarded.

Shaping, or behavior-shaping, is a variant of operant
conditioning. Instead of waiting for a subject to exhibit
a desired behavior, any behavior leading to the target behavior is rewarded. For example, B. F. Skinner (19041990) discovered that, in order to train a rat to push a
lever, any movement in the direction of the lever had to
be rewarded, until finally, the rat was trained to push a
lever. Once the target behavior is reached, however, no
other behavior is rewarded. In other words, the subject
behavior is shaped, or molded, into the desired form.
Although rejected by many orientations within the
field of psychology, behavioral techniques, particularly
shaping, are widely used as therapeutic tools for the
treatment of various disorders, especially those affecting
verbal behavior. For example, behavior shaping has been
used to treat selective, or elective, mutism, a condition
manifested by an otherwise normal child’s refusal to
speak in school.
Therapists have also relied on behavior shaping in
treating cases of severe autism in children. While autistic children respond to such stimulus objects as toys and
musical instruments, it is difficult to elicit speech from
them. However, researchers have noted that behavior
shaping is more effective when speech attempts are reinforced than when speech production is expected. When
unsuccessful efforts to produce speech are rewarded, the
child feels inspired to make a greater effort, which may
lead to actual speech.
While recognizing the effectiveness of behavior
shaping in the laboratory and in therapy, experts, particularly psychologists who do not subscribe to behaviorism, have questioned the long-term validity of induced
behavior change. For example, researchers have noted
that people have a tendency to revert to old behavior patterns, particularly when the new behavior is not rewarded any more. In many cases, as Alfie Kohn has written,
behavior-shaping techniques used in school, instead of
588

William Herbert Sheldon
1898-1977
American physician and psychologist who attempted to correlate body type with personality.

William Herbert Sheldon developed “constitutional
psychology,” the study of the relationships between
physical attributes and personality traits. To describe
physical build, Sheldon studied thousands of photographs and developed a rating system for three major
components or somatotypes—endomorphy, mesomorphy, and ectomorphy—and three secondary components.
Likewise, he developed a rating system for three primary
components of temperament. He found a correlation
between the physical and temperamental ratings. Sheldon was the first to use standardized photography for
studying physical traits.
Born in 1898, Sheldon grew up on a farm in Warwick, Rhode Island, as one of three children of William
Herbert and Mary Abby (Greene) Sheldon. Educated at
local public schools, Sheldon, whose father was a naturalist, worked as an ornithologist while studying at
Brown University. After serving in the army as a second
lieutenant during World War I, Sheldon received his A.B.
degree in 1919. Subsequently, he worked as an oil field
scout, a wolf hunter in New Mexico, and a high school
teacher before earning his master’s degree at the University of Colorado and his Ph.D. in psychology from the
University of Chicago in 1925. That year he married
Louise Steger, although they later divorced. Sheldon
taught psychology at the University of Texas in Austin,
at the University of Chicago, and at the University of
Wisconsin. In 1933 he earned his M.D. from the University of Chicago. Following an internship, he won a fellowship to study psychiatry with Carl Jung in Zurich,
Switzerland.
In 1936, Sheldon became a professor of psychology
at the University of Chicago. After two years, he moved
to Harvard University to collaborate with Smith S.
Stevens, an experimental psychologist. After serving in

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Sheldon authored several books in the “Human
Constitution Series,” as well as two books of essays in
which he tried to merge religion with social psychiatry.
He believed that the correlations he observed between
physique and personality reflected both the rewards
based on behavior for a given physical type, and societal
expectations based on physical appearance. Sheldon also
examined relationships between physique and delinquent
behavior and physique and psychopathology. He used
three primary components to define psychopathology. In
later years, Sheldon replaced his somatotyping scheme
with a method called the Trunk Index.
Sheldon’s correlations remain unproven and, in
1995, it was revealed that many of the photographs Sheldon studied were obtained by requiring students at universities to be photographed naked and without informed
consent as to how the pictures might be used. Sheldon
died of heart disease in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in
1977.

A native Californian, Shinn was born in 1858 to parents who emigrated from the East and established a farming homestead in Niles, California, where she lived her
entire life. In 1879, at the age of 25, she became editor of
the Overland Monthly, a literary magazine that had fallen
on hard times in post-Civil War California. Dividing her
time between the family ranch and the journal, Shinn
cared for her aging parents, ran the ranch with her brother
and his wife, and helped care for their daughter, Ruth,
who was born in 1890. Inspired by personal interest in
her niece, Shinn applied her writer’s skills to create a
carefully recorded and minutely detailed two-year account of her niece’s physical growth and emotional development. Delivered as a paper entitled “The First Two
Years of the Child” at the World’s Columbian Exposition
in Chicago in 1893, Shinn’s observational study was
hailed as the first of its kind in America. Convinced by
others that her work represented a significant contribution
to child psychology, Shinn resigned from the Overland
Monthly in 1894 and enrolled as a doctoral candidate at
the University of California at Berkeley, completing the
degree with the publication of her dissertation in 1898.
Compelling family needs and pressures led Shinn to
abandon her scholarly pursuits and return to the family
ranch to care for her invalid mother and aging father. By
1913, in her mid-fifties and in ill-health herself, Shinn
undertook the education of her younger brother’s four
children, devoting the rest of her life to her family until
her death in 1940.
Further Reading
Scarborough, Elizabeth, and Laurel Furumoto. Untold Lives:
The First Generation of American Women Psychologists.
52-69. New York: Columbia University Press, 1987.

Shyness

Margaret Alic

Uneasiness experienced when confronted by new
people and situations.

Milicent W. Shinn
1858-1940
American child psychologist best known for her
seminal systematic observational study of a child.

As the first woman to earn a Ph.D. from the University of California, Milicent Shinn is credited today for
her outstanding early American study, “Notes on the Development of a Child.” First published in 1898 as a doctoral dissertation, this work is still hailed as a masterpiece and a classic in its field.

Most people, from social recluses to the rich and famous, probably have experienced feelings of shyness at
various times in their lives. Physiological symptoms may
include blushing, increased heart rate, sweating, and
shaking. Just as these outward manifestations vary in
type and intensity from person to person, so do the inner
feelings. Anxious thoughts and worries, low self-esteem,
self-criticism, and concern over a lack of social skills,
real or imagined, are common. The causes of shyness are
not known. Some researchers believe it results from a
genetic predisposition. Others theorize that uncommunicative parents restrict a child’s development of the so-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

589

Shyness

the Army as a lieutenant colonel during the Second
World War, in 1945, he married Milancie Hill. The following year, Sheldon became Director of the Constitution Clinic and Laboratory at the Columbia University
College of Physicians and Surgeons, and he began examining the relationships between physical attributes and
disease. In 1959, he became a clinical professor of medicine at the University of Oregon Medical School in Portland. From 1951 until 1977, he directed the Oregon follow-up studies in constitutional medicine. Concurrently,
he held positions as the director of research for the Biological Humanics Foundation of Cambridge, Massachusetts, as a research associate at the Institute of Human
Development at the University of California at Berkeley,
and as attending chief of research at Rockland State Hospital in Orangeburg, New York. Sheldon became emeritus professor at the University of Oregon in 1970.

Sibling rivalry

cial skills that compensate for discomfort caused by new
experiences and people, resulting in shyness. Variously,
it has been considered a symptom of social phobia or a
simple characteristic of introversion.
Psychological research that follows large numbers of
children from very early childhood to adulthood has
found that a tendency to be shy with others is one of the
most stable traits that is preserved from the first three or
four years of life through young adulthood. Learning or
improving social skills through self-help courses or formal
training in assertiveness and public speaking are some of
the methods used to diminish the effects of shyness.
Further Reading
Izard, C. Human Emotions. New York: Plenum Press, 1977.
Kagan, Jerome. Galen’s Prophecy: Temperament in Human
Nature. New York: Basic Books, 1994.
Kagan, J., and N. Snidman. “Biological Bases of Childhood
Shyness.” Science 240, 1988, pp. 167-71.
Tangney, J.P., and K.W. Fischer, eds. Self-Conscious Emotions:
Shame, Guilt and Pride. New York: Guilford, 1995.

Sibling rivalry
See Birth order

Signal detection theory
A psychological theory regarding a threshold of
sensory detection.

One of the early goals of psychologists was to
measure the sensitivity of our sensory systems. This activity led to the development of the idea of a threshold,
the least intense amount of stimulation needed for a
person to be able to see, hear, feel, or detect the stimulus. Unfortunately, one of the problems with this concept was that even though the level of stimulation remained constant, people were inconsistent in detecting
the stimulus. Factors other than the sensitivity of sense
receptors influence the signal detection process. There
is no single, fixed value below which a person never
detects the stimulus and above which the person always
detects it. In general, psychologists typically define
threshold as that intensity of stimulation that a person
can detect some percentage of the time, for example, 50
percent of the time.
An approach to resolving this dilemma is provided
by signal detection theory. This approach abandons the
590

idea of a threshold. Instead, the theory involves treating
detection of the stimulus as a decision-making process,
part of which is determined by the nature of the stimulus,
by how sensitive a person is to the stimulus, and by cognitive factors. In other words, a person will be able to detect more intense sounds or lights more easily than less
intense stimuli. Further, a more sensitive person requires
less stimulus intensity than a less sensitive person would.
Finally, when a person is quite uncertain as to whether
the stimulus was present, the individual will decide
based on what kind of mistake in judgment is worse: to
say that no stimulus was present when there actually was
one or to say that there was a stimulus when, in reality,
there was none.
An example from everyday life illustrates this point.
Suppose a person is expecting an important visitor,
someone that it would be unfortunate to miss. As time
goes on, the person begins to “hear” the visitor and may
open the door, only to find that nobody is there. This person is “detecting” a stimulus, or signal, that is not there
because it would be worse to miss the person than to
check to see if the individual is there, only to find that
the visitor has not yet arrived.
In a typical sensory experiment that involves a large
number of trials, an observer must try to detect a very
faint sound or light that varies in intensity from clearly
below normal detection levels to clearly above. The person responds positively (i.e., there is a stimulus) or negatively (i.e., there is no stimulus). There are two possible
responses, “Yes” and “No.” There are also two different
possibilities for the stimulus, either present or absent. The
accompanying table describes the combination of an observer’s response and whether the stimulus is actually
there. The table refers to a task with an auditory stimulus,
but it could be modified to involve stimuli for any sense.
Psychologists have established that when stimuli are
difficult to detect, cognitive factors are critical in the decision an observer makes. If a person participates in an
experiment and receives one dollar for each Hit and there
is no penalty for a False Alarm, then it is in the person’s
best interest to say that the stimulus was present whenever there is uncertainty. On the other hand, if the person
loses two dollars for each False Alarm, then it is better
for the observer to be cautious in saying that a stimulus
occurred. This combination of rewards and penalties for
correct and incorrect decisions is referred to as the Payoff Matrix. If the Payoff Matrix changes, then the person’s pattern of responses will also change. This alteration in responses is called a criterion shift.
There is always a trade-off between the number of
Hits and False Alarms. When a person is very willing to
say that the signal was present, that individual will show

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Significance level

SIGNAL DETECTION THEORY
Status of Stimulus
Stimulus is present

Observer's Decision
Yes, there is a sound.
This is termed a HIT, because the sound is there and the observer
detects it.
No, there is no sound.
This is termed a MISS, because the sound is there, but the observer fails
to detect it.

Stimulus is absent

Yes, there is a sound.
This is termed a FALSE ALARM, because the sound is present, but the
observer fails to detect it.
No, there is no sound.
This is termed CORRECT REJECTION, because the sound is not there,
and the observer correctly notes its absence.

more Hits, but will also have more False Alarms. Fewer
Hits will be associated with fewer False Alarms. As such,
the number of Hits is not a very revealing indicator of
how sensitive a person is; if the person claims to have
heard the stimulus on every single trial, then the person
will have said “Yes” in every instance in which the stimulus was actually there. This is not very impressive, however, because the person will also have said “Yes” on
every trial on which there was no stimulus. Psychologists
have used mathematical approaches to determine the sensitivity of an individual for any given pattern of Hits and
False Alarms; this index of sensitivity is called d’ (called
d-prime). A large value of d’ reflects greater sensitivity.
The basic idea behind signal detection theory is that
neurons are constantly sending information to the brain,
even when no stimuli are present. This is called neural
noise. The level of neural noise fluctuates constantly.
When a faint stimulus, or signal, occurs, it creates a neural
response. The brain must decide whether the neural activity reflects noise alone, or whether there was also a signal.
For very intense signals, there is no problem in deciding if there was a stimulus because the neural effect
of the signal far outweighs the neural effect of the noise.
Similarly, when there is no signal, the nervous system
does not respond as it does when an outside signal is present, so decisions are easy. On the other hand, for nearthreshold signals, it can be difficult to know whether
neural activity results from noise alone or from a signal
plus noise. At this point, the observer makes a decision
based on the payoff matrix.

Significance level
A method to describe the reliability of test results.

When researchers measure a behavior, they often
compare groups to determine whether they differ on
that behavior. The ultimate goal is to determine
whether the difference would occur if the measurements were administered a second time, or whether the
difference is accidental and not likely to recur. The degree of reliability relates to the concept of significance
level. The significance level refers to how likely it is
that an error (that is, a wrong decision about whether
the groups differ from one another) would be made.
Psychologists generally accept a 5 percent error rate as
reasonable. In order to decide whether differences are
reliable, psychologists conduct statistical tests that provide a measure of confidence in their conclusions. This
area of statistics is called inferential statistics because
psychologists draw inferences, or conclusions, about
what would happen if they made similar measurements
with a different set of subjects.
If two similar groups are being measured, then they
will produce different scores even though the difference
is not particularly meaningful. If a researcher measures
how much time students in separate mathematics classes
take to solve a similar problem, the average for those two
classes is likely to differ somewhat, even if the two classes consist of students with comparable abilities
Further Reading

Further Reading
Goldstein, E.B. Sensation and Perception, 3rd ed. Belmont,
CA: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1989.

Berman, Simeon M. Mathematical Statistics: An Introduction
Based on the Normal Distribution. Scranton, PA: Intext
Educational Publishers, 1971.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

591

B. F. Skinner

Christensen, Larry B. Experimental Methodology, 5th ed.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1991.
D’Amato, M. R. Experimental Psychology: Methodology, Psychophysics, and Learning. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1970
Elmes, David G. Research Methods in Psychology, 4th ed. St.
Paul: West Publishing Company, 1992.
Kantowitz, Barry H. Experimental Psychology: Understanding
Psychological Research, 5th ed. St. Paul: West Publishing
Company, 1994.
Martin, David W. Doing Psychology Experiments, 2nd ed.
Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1985.

B. F. Skinner
1904-1990
American psychologist and advocate of behaviorism.

B. F. (Burrhus Frederic) Skinner was born in
Susquehanna, Pennsylvania. As a youth, he showed talent for music and writing, as well as mechanical aptitude. He attended Hamilton College as an English major,
with the goal of becoming a professional writer. After
graduation, Skinner, discouraged over his literary
prospects, became interested in behavioristic psychology
after reading the works of John Watson and Ivan
Pavlov. He entered Harvard University as a graduate student in psychology in 1928 and received his degree three
years later. Skinner remained at Harvard through 1936,
by which time he was a junior fellow of the prestigious
Society of Fellows. While at Harvard, he laid the foundation for a new system of behavioral analysis through his
research in the field of animal learning, utilizing unique
experimental equipment of his own design.
His most successful and well-known apparatus,
known as the Skinner Box, was a cage in which a laboratory rat could, by pressing on a bar, activate a mechanism that would drop a food pellet into the cage. Another
device recorded each press of the bar, producing a permanent record of experimental results without the presence of a tester. Skinner analyzed the rats’ bar-pressing
behavior by varying his patterns of reinforcement (feeding) to learn their responses to different schedules (including random ones). Using this box to study how rats
“operated on” their environment led Skinner to formulate the principle of operant conditioning—applicable to
a wide range of both human and animal behaviors—
through which an experimenter can gradually shape the
behavior of a subject by manipulating its responses
through reinforcement or lack of it. In contrast to
Pavlovian, or response, conditioning, which depends on
an outside stimulus, Skinner’s operant conditioning depends on the subject’s responses themselves. Skinner in592

B. F. Skinner (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

troduced the concept of operant conditioning to the public in his first book, The Behavior of Organisms (1938).
Between 1936 and 1948 Skinner held faculty positions at the University of Minnesota and the University
of Indiana, after which he returned permanently to Harvard. His ideas eventually became so influential that the
American Psychological Association created a separate
division of studies related to them (Division 25: “The
Experimental Analysis of Behavior”), and four journals
of behaviorist research were established. In the 1940s
Skinner began training animals to perform complex activities by first teaching them chains of simpler ones. He
was quite successful in training laboratory animals to
perform apparently remarkable and complex activities.
One example of this involved pigeons that learned to
play table tennis.
Skinner’s observation of the effectiveness of incremental training of animals led him to formulate the principles of programmed instruction for human students, in
which the concept of reward, or reinforcement, is fundamental, and complex subjects such as mathematics are
broken down into simple components presented in order
of increasing difficulty. Presented with a set of relatively
simple questions, students receive immediate reinforcement—and thus incentive to continue—by being told that

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Skinner’s work was also influential in the clinical
treatment of mental and emotional disorders. In the late
1940s he began to develop the behavior modification
method, in which subjects receive a series of small rewards for desired behavior. Considered a useful technique for psychologists and psychiatrists with deeply
disturbed patients, behavior modification has also been
widely used by the general population in overcoming
obesity, shyness, speech defects, addiction to smoking,
and other problems. Extending his ideas to the realm of
philosophy, Skinner concluded that all behavior was the
result of either positive or negative reinforcement, and
thus the existence of free will was merely an illusion. To
explore the social ramifications of his behaviorist principles, he wrote the novel Walden Two (1948), which depicted a utopian society in which all reinforcement was
positive. While detractors of this controversial work regarded its vision of social control through strict positive
reinforcement as totalitarian, the 1967 founding of the
Twin Oaks Community in Virginia was inspired by Skinner’s ideas. Skinner elaborated further on his ideas about
positive social control in his book Beyond Freedom and
Dignity (1971), which critiques the notion of human autonomy, arguing that many actions ascribed to free will
are performed due to necessity.
Skinner has been listed in The 100 Most Important
People in the World, and in a 1975 survey he was identified as the best-known scientist in the United States.
Skinner’s other books include Science and Human Behavior (1953) and Verbal Behavior (1957).
See also Behaviorism
Further Reading
Carpenter, Finley. The Skinner Primer: Behind Freedom and
Dignity. New York: Free Press, 1974.
Skinner, B.F. Particulars of My Life. New York: Knopf, 1976.
———. The Shaping of a Behaviorist. New York: Knopf, 1979.
———. A Matter of Consequences. New York: Knopf, 1983.

Sleep
A state that suspends the voluntary exercise of bodily functions and consciousness.

A healthy adult sleeps an average of 7.5 hours each
night and most people (approximately 95 percent) sleep
between 6.5 and 8.5 hours. Tracking brain waves with
the aid of electroencephalographs (EEGs), researchers
have identified six stages of sleep (including a pre-sleep
stage), each characterized by distinctive brain-wave frequencies. Stage 0 is the prelude to sleep, which is characterized by low amplitude and fast frequency alpha
waves in the brain. At this stage, a person becomes relaxed, drowsy, and closes their eyes. Stages 1 through 4
are sometimes characterized as NREM (non-rapid eye
movement) sleep. In Stage 1, the eyes begin to roll and
rhythmic alpha waves give way to irregular theta waves
that are lower in amplitude and slower in frequency as
the person loses responsiveness to stimuli, experiences,
fleeting thoughts, and images. In Stage 2, electroencephalogram tracings show fast frequency bursts of
brain activity called sleep spindles, marked by muscle
tension and accompanied by a gradual decline in heart
rate, respiration, and temperature. Stages 3 and 4 normally occur 30 to 45 minutes after falling asleep. In
Stage 3, there are fewer sleep spindles, but high amplitude and low frequency delta waves appear. When these
begin to occur more than 50 percent of the time, the
fourth stage of sleep has been entered. Delta waves demarcate the deepest levels of sleep, when heart rate, respiration, temperature, and blood flow to the brain are reduced and growth hormones are secreted. A person
roused from Stage 4 sleep will be groggy and confused.
Altogether, it takes about a half hour to pass through
these four stages of sleep.
Rapid eye movement (REM sleep), which makes up
approximately 20 percent of sleep time, is interspersed
with NREM sleep every 30 to 40 minutes throughout the
night. It is during REM sleep that dreams are experienced. In this state, the same fast frequency, low-amplitude beta waves that characterize waking states occur,
and a person’s physiological signs—heart rate, breathing, and blood pressure—also resemble those in a waking state. However, muscle tone decreases to the point of
paralysis, with sudden twitches, especially in the face
and hands. REM periods may last from 15 minutes at the
beginning of a sleep cycle to one hour at the end of it.
Most people complete four to six complete sleep cycles
each night, with each cycle lasting about 90 minutes.
These cycles vary in composition, however; early in the
night most of the time is spent in Stage 3 and 4 sleep,
with Stage 2 and REM sleep predominating later on.
Sleep patterns also vary in the course of a person’s life.
On the average, an infant sleeps about 16 hours a day, in
contrast to a 70-year-old who sleeps only about six
hours. While REM sleep comprises about half of total
sleep at birth, it eventually decreases to only 25 percent.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

593

Sleep disorders

their answers were correct. The programmed learning
movement became highly influential in the United States
and abroad. Although this technique eventually came
under criticism by educators advocating more holistic
methods of instruction, it remains a valuable teaching
tool. Courses and course materials based on it have been
developed for many subjects, and at levels of difficulty
ranging from kindergarten through graduate school.

Sleep disorders

Sleeping patterns also vary greatly among individuals,
and even among different cultures (in terms of napping,
for example).
Two theories of sleep, the repair and the adaptive
theories, attempt to explain why sleep occurs. In the
repair theory, sleep serves a biological need, replenishing key areas of the brain or body which are depleted
during the day. The adaptive theory suggests that sleep
as a function evolved over time because it prevented
early humans from wasting energy and exposing themselves to nocturnal predators, thus aiding in survival.
REM sleep in particular has been thought to serve special functions. Research subjects whose REM sleep
was interrupted made up for the loss by spending extra
time in the REM stage on successive nights. It has also
been suggested that REM sleep aids the activity of
neurons that use the neurotransmitter norepinephrine, thus maintaining waking alertness. Persons deprived of REM sleep have shown poorer retention of
skills learned during the day, leading to the hypothesis
that REM sleep helps in assimilating daytime learning
experiences.
As with many other physiological processes, sleep is
linked to a 24-hour circadian rhythm and affected by signals such as light and dark. The effects of disrupting the
sleep-wake cycle can be seen in jet lag, which is characterized by fatigue, irritability, lack of alertness, and
sleeping problems. A person affected by jet lag feels like
sleeping at the wrong times of day. It has been found that
the body maintains a circadian sleep-wake rhythm even
in the absence of external cues like lightness and darkness, although research subjects deprived of such cues
eventually adopt a 25-hour “day.” The “internal clock”
that maintains this pattern is a section of the brain called
the supra chiasmatic nucleus (SCN), located in the hypothalamus.
Various disorders interfere with sleep. The most
common is insomnia, the inability to fall asleep or stay
asleep. Nearly one-third of all Americans are affected
by some degree of insomnia. Often associated with
mental distress, insomnia is treated with medication,
psychotherapy, relaxation techniques, or a combination
of these methods. The medications most commonly prescribed are benzodiazepines (Valium, Halcyon, Restoril)
and barbiturates. While they alleviate insomnia in the
short run, these drugs interfere with normal sleep patterns, and can lead to increased tolerance and dependence. Researchers and clinicians have had success
treating insomnia with the hormone melatonin, a naturally occurring substance related to sleep onset and secreted by the pineal gland. Melatonin supplements first
became available in American health food stores in
1993 and have become increasingly popular as a sleep
594

aid, although their use has caused some controversy in
medical circles.
Narcolepsy, a disorder characterized by sudden and
uncontrollable occurrences of sleep, afflicts 100,000
people in the United States. This condition is genetically
linked, and may be curable in the future. Individuals affected by narcolepsy abruptly enter REM sleep states
during the daytime, collapsing and remaining immobile
for a period of time after awakening. Napping and stimulants have both been used to treat this condition. Another
disorder associated with sleep is sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS), in which a healthy baby stops breathing during sleep, fails to awaken, and suffocates. While
the exact cause of SIDS is unknown, researchers are attempting to identify and save at-risk infants by studying
the relationship between the disorder and sleeping patterns. In sleep apnea, a person repeatedly stops breathing
while asleep but awakes each time. The disrupted sleep
that results from these multiple awakenings leaves the
sleeper fatigued and sleepy during the daytime. Night
terrors are non-REM dream experiences from which the
sleeper never fully awakes and which he or she does not
recall upon awakening. This condition mostly occurs in
children and can be treated with hypnosis or medication
in severe cases.
See also Sleep Disorders.

Sleep disorders
Chronic disturbances in the quantity or quality of
sleep that interfere with a person’s ability to function normally.

An estimated 15 percent of Americans have chronic
sleep problems, while about 10 percent have occasional
trouble sleeping. Sleep disorders are listed among the
clinical syndromes in Axis I of the American Psychiatric
Association’s Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. They may be either primary (unrelated to
any other disorder, medical or psychological) or secondary (the result of physical illness, psychological disorders such as depression, drug or alcohol use, stress, or
lifestyle factors, such as jet lag).
The Association for Sleep Disorders Centers has
divided sleep problems into four categories. The first
and most common is insomnia (Disorders of Initiating
and Maintaining Sleep). In insomnia, sleep loss is so
severe that it interferes with daytime functioning and
well-being. Three types of insomnia have been identified (although a single person can have more than one):
sleep-onset insomnia (difficulty falling asleep); sleep-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Sleep
A patient suffering from acute sleep apnea is hooked up to monitors in preparation for a night’s sleep at a Stanford University
sleep lab. (Photo by Russell D. Curtis. National Audubon Society Collection/ Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced by permission.)

maintenance insomnia (difficulty staying asleep); and
terminal insomnia (waking early and not being able to
go back to sleep). While insomnia can occur at any
stage of life, it becomes increasingly common as people get older.
Some cases of insomnia are thought to be caused by
abnormalities in the part of the brain that controls sleeping and waking. However, insomnia commonly has a
wide variety of non-neurological causes, including
stress, physical pain, irregular hours, and psychological
disorders. Temporary acute insomnia related to a major
event or crisis can turn chronic if a person becomes overly anxious about sleep itself and is unable to return to his
or her normal sleep pattern. Called learned or behavioral
insomnia, this problem troubles about 15 percent of people who seek professional help. In about 30 percent of
cases, an underlying psychological disorder—often depression—is responsible for insomnia. Disorders that
can cause insomnia include anxiety disorders (such as
post-traumatic stress disorder), obsessive-compulsive
disorder, and schizophrenia. Normal sleep may be disrupted by a variety of substances, including caffeine,
nicotine, alcohol, appetite suppressants, and prescription

medications such as steroids, thyroid medications, and
certain antihypertensive drugs.
Many people take medications for insomnia, ranging from over-the-counter preparations (which are basically antihistamines) to prescription drugs including
barbiturates and benzodiazepines. The American Sleep
Disorders Association recommends benzodiazepines (a
class of drugs that includes Valium and Restoril) over
barbiturates and other sedatives, although only for limited use to treat temporary insomnia or as a supplement to psychotherapy and other treatments for
chronic insomnia. Benzodiazepines can lead to tolerance and addiction, and withdrawal can actually worsen insomnia. People who take sleeping pills for two
weeks or more and then quit are likely to experience a
rebound effect that can disrupt their sleep for a period
of up to several weeks.
A variety of behavioral treatments are available for
insomnia which, when practiced consistently, can be as
effective as medication without side effects or withdrawal
symptoms. Different types of relaxation therapy, including progressive muscle relaxation, hypnosis, meditation,
and biofeedback, can be taught through special classes,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

595

Sleep

audiotapes, or individual sessions. Cognitive therapy focuses on deflecting anxiety-producing thoughts and behaviors at bedtime. Stimulus control therapy is based on
the idea that people with learned insomnia have become
conditioned to associate their beds with wakefulness. Persons involved in this type of therapy are not allowed to
remain in bed at night if they can not fall asleep; they are
instructed to go to another room and engage in a nonstressful activity until they become sleepy. In the morning, they must arise at a set hour no matter how much or
little sleep they have had the night before. Finally, sleep
restriction therapy consists of limiting one’s hours in bed
to the average number of hours one has generally been
sleeping and then gradually increasing them.
The second category of sleep disorder is hypersomnia, or Disorders of Excessive Somnolence. People affected by any type of hypersomnia report abnormal degrees of
sleepiness, either at night or in the daytime. While the
most common causes are sleep apnea and narcolepsy, hypersomnia may also be caused by physical illness, medications, withdrawal from stimulants, or other psychological disorders. Sleep apnea consists of disrupted breathing
which wakens a person repeatedly during the night.
Though unaware of the problem while it is occurring, people with sleep apnea are unable to get a good night’s sleep
and feel tired and sleepy during the day. The condition is
generally caused either by a physical obstruction of the
upper airway or an impairment of the brain’s respiration
control centers. Common treatment methods include
weight loss (obesity is a risk factor for the condition), refraining from sleeping on one’s back, and medications that
reduce rapid eye movement (REM) sleep. A technique
called continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) pushes
air into the sleeper’s throat all night through a small mask,
preventing the airway from collapsing. In addition, a surgical procedure is available that modifies the upper airway
to allow for freer breathing.
The other main type of hypersomnia is narcolepsy—
sudden attacks of REM sleep during waking hours.
Many narcoleptics experience additional symptoms including cataplexy (a sudden loss of muscle tone while in
a conscious state), hallucinations and other unusual perceptual phenomena, and sleep paralysis, an inability to
move for several minutes upon awakening. Between
200,000 and 500,000 Americans are affected by narcolepsy, which is caused by a physiological brain dysfunction that can be inherited or develop after trauma to
the brain from disease or injury. Treatments include
stimulants to combat daytime sleepiness, tricyclic antidepressants to suppress REM sleep, and other medications to control cataplexy.
Disorders of the Sleep-Wake Schedule—the third
type of sleep disturbance—are also called circadian
596

rhythm disorders because they interfere with the 24-hour
biological clock that regulates many bodily processes.
People with these disorders have trouble adhering to the
sleep-wake schedule required by their job or environment, often due to shift work or jet lag. However, some
persons suffer from delayed or advanced sleep onset
problems with no external aggravating factor. Exposure
to bright lights and chronotherapy, a technique for resetting one’s biological clock, have been effective in the
treatment of some circadian rhythm disorders.
Parasomnias, the final category of sleep disorder, involve unusual phenomena—nightmares, sleep terrors,
and sleepwalking—that occur during sleep or during the
period between sleeping and waking. Nightmare and
sleep terror disorders are similar in that both occur mainly in children and involve frightening nighttime awakenings (in the case of sleep terrors, the person is awakened
from non-REM sleep by feelings of agitation that can
last for up to 10 minutes). Both are often outgrown but
may be treated with psychotherapy, low-dose benzodiazepines, and, in the case of nightmare disorder, relaxation training. Sleepwalking occurs during the deep nonREM sleep of stages three and four and is also most
common in children, who tend to outgrow it after the age
of 12. It is also more common among males than females. The greatest danger posed by sleepwalking is injury through falls or other mishaps.
Other features of parasomnias include bruxism
(teeth grinding) and enuresis (bedwetting). Both are
often stress-related, although enuresis may also be
caused by genitourinary disorders, neurological disturbances, or toilet training problems. Bruxism may be relieved through relaxation techniques or the use of a custom-made oral device that discourages grinding or at
least prevents tooth damage. Enuresis often responds to
the medication imipramine (Tofranil) and various behavior modification techniques. A parasomnia only identified within the past decade is REM sleep behavior disorder. Those affected by this condition—usually middleaged or older men—engage in vigorous and bizarre
physical activities during REM sleep in response to
dreams, which are generally of a violent, intense nature.
As their actions may injure themselves or their sleeping
partners, this disorder, thought to be neurological in nature, has been treated with hypnosis and medications including clonazepam and carbamazepine.
Further Reading
Hales, Dianne R. The Complete Book of Sleep: How Your
Nights Affect Your Days. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Longman, 1981.
Lamberg, Lynne. The American Medical Association Guide to
Better Sleep. New York: Random House, 1984.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The sense that perceives odor by means of the nose
and olfactory nerve.

Olfaction is one of the two chemical senses: smell
and taste. Both arise from interaction between chemical
and receptor cells. In olfaction, the chemical is volatile,
or airborne. Breathed in through the nostrils or taken in
via the throat by chewing and swallowing, it passes
through either the nose or an opening in the palate at the
back of the mouth, and moves toward receptor cells located in the lining of the nasal passage. As the chemical
moves past the receptor cells, part of it is absorbed into
the uppermost surface of the nasal passages called the olfactory epithelium, located at the top of the nasal cavity.
There, two one-inch-square patches of tissue covered
with mucus dissolve the chemical, stimulating the receptors, which lie under the mucus. The chemical molecules
bind to the receptors, triggering impulses that travel to
the brain. There are thousands of different receptors in
the cells of the nasal cavity that can detect as many as
10,000 different odors. Each receptor contains hair-like
structures, or cilia, which are probably the initial point of
contact with olfactory stimuli. Research suggests that the
sensitivity of the olfactory system is related to the number of both receptors and cilia. For example, a dog has
20 times as many receptor cells as a human and over 10
times as many cilia per receptor.
The cribriform plate forms the roof of the nasal cavity. The olfactory nerve passes through openings in this
bone and ends in the olfactory bulb, a neural structure at
the base of the brain. From there, olfactory signals are
diffused throughout the brain to areas including the
amygdala, hippocampus, pyriform cortex (located at the
base of the temporal lobe), and the hypothalamus. Olfaction is the only sense that does not involve the thalamus. Olfaction messages are especially intensive in the
amygdala, a part of the brain responsible for emotions,
which may help the unusual power of certain smells to
trigger emotions and recollections based on memories
from the past. Further, a person’s reaction to smell is mediated by context. For example, the same smell present
in body odor is responsible for the flavor of cheese. In
the first case, the smell is perceived as negative, in the
second, it is positive. In humans, olfaction intensifies the
taste of food, warns of potentially dangerous food, as
well as other dangers (such as fire), and triggers associations involving memory and emotion. Olfaction is an
especially important sense in many animals. A predator
may use it to detect prey, while prey may use it to avoid
predators. It also has a role in the mating process through
chemicals called pheromones, which can cause ovulation

Social competence
Mastering the social, emotional, and cognitive
skills and behaviors needed to succeed as a member of society.

Social competence refers to the social, emotional,
and cognitive skills and behaviors that children need for
successful social adaptation. Despite this simple definition, social competence is an elusive concept, because
the skills and behaviors required for healthy social development vary with the age of the child and with the demands of particular situations. A socially competent
preschool child behaves in a much different manner than
a socially competent adolescent; conversely, the same
behaviors (e.g., aggression, shyness) have different implications for social adaptation depending upon the age
of the child and the particulars of the social context.
A child’s social competence depends upon a number
of factors including the child’s social skills, social
awareness, and self-confidence. Social skills is a term
used to describe the child’s knowledge of, and ability to
use, a variety of social behaviors that are appropriate to a
given interpersonal situation and that are pleasing to others in each situation. The capacity to inhibit egocentric,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

597

Social competence

Smell

in females or signal a male that a female is in a sexually
receptive state. Although the existence of human
pheromones has not been verified, olfaction still plays a
role in human sexual attraction, as well as in parenting.
Mothers can usually identify their newborn infants by
smell, and breast-feeding babies can distinguish between
the smell of their mothers and that of other breast-feeding women. Researchers have also found that children
are able to recognize their siblings by smell and parents
can use smell to distinguish among their own children.
However, as people age the sense of smell diminishes,
especially for men. By age 80, many men have almost no
ability to detect odors. The intensity of a particular odor
is strongly affected by adaptation. Odors may become
undetectable after only a brief period of exposure. The
sense of smell also plays an important role in the discrimination of flavors, a fact demonstrated by the reduced sense of taste in people with colds. The enjoyment
of food actually comes more from odors detected by the
olfactory system than from the functioning of the taste
system. The olfactory and gustatory (taste) pathways are
known to converge in parts of the brain, although it is not
known exactly how the two systems work together.
While an aversion to certain flavors (such as bitter flavors) is innate, associations with odors are learned.

Social competence

impulsive, or negative social behavior is also a reflection
of a child’s social skills. The term emotional intelligence refers to the child’s ability to understand others’
emotions, perceive subtle social cues, “read” complex
social situations, and demonstrate insight about others’
motivations and goals. Children who have a wide repertoire of social skills and who are socially aware and perceptive are likely to be socially competent. Social competence is the broader term used to describe a child’s social effectiveness—a child’s ability to establish and
maintain high quality and mutually satisfying relationships and to avoid negative treatment or victimization
from others. In addition to social skills and emotional intelligence, factors such as the child’s self-confidence or
social anxiety can affect his/her social competence. Social competence can also be affected by the social context and the extent to which there is a good match between the child’s skills, interests, and abilities and those
of the other children in his/her environment. For example, a quiet and studious boy may appear socially incompetent in a peer group full of raucous athletes, but may
do fine socially if a better peer group “niche” can be
found for him, such as a group of peers who share his interests in quiet games or computers.

Importance of social competence
Whereas parents are the primary source of social
and emotional support for children during the first
years of life, in later years peers begin to play a significant complementary and unique role in promoting child
social-emotional development. Increasingly with age,
peers rather than parents become preferred companions, providing important sources of entertainment and
support. In the context of peer interactions, young children engage in fantasy play that allows them to assume
different roles, learn to take another person’s perspective, and develop an understanding of the social rules
and conventions of their culture. In addition, relationships with peers typically involve more give-and-take
than relationships with adults, and thus provide an opportunity for the development of social competencies
such as cooperation and negotiation. During adolescence, peer relations become particularly important for
children. A key developmental task of adolescence is
the formation of an identity—a sense of the kind of
person you are and the kind of person you want to be.
Adolescents “try on” different social roles as they interact with peers, and peers serve as a social “stepping
stone” as adolescents move away from their emotional
dependence upon their parents and toward autonomous
functioning as an adult. In many ways, then, childhood
peer relations serve as “training grounds” for future interpersonal relations, providing children with opportu598

nities to learn about reciprocity and intimacy. These
skills are associated with effective interpersonal relations in adult life, including relations with co-workers
and with romantic partners.
When children experience serious difficulties in the
domain of peer relations, the development of social competencies may be threatened. Rejection or victimization
by peers may become a source of significant stress to
children, contributing to feelings of loneliness and low
self-esteem. In addition, peer rejection can escalate in a
negative developmental spiral. That is, when children
with poor social skills become rejected, they are often
excluded from positive interactions with peers—interactions that are critical for the learning of social skills. Rejected children typically have fewer options in terms of
play partners and friends than do accepted children. Observations of rejected children have revealed that they
spend more time playing alone and interacting in smaller
groups than their more popular peers. In addition, the
companions of rejected children tend to be younger or
more unpopular than the companions of accepted children. Exclusion from a normal peer group can deprive
rejected children of opportunities to develop adaptive social behaviors. Hence, the social competence deficits of
rejected children may increase over time, along with
feelings of social anxiety and inadequacy.

Social competence deficits and peer
rejection
Many children experience difficulties getting along
with peers at some point during their youth. Sometimes
these problems are short-lived and for some children the
effects of being left out or teased by classmates are transitory. For other children, however, being ignored or rejected by peers may be a lasting problem that has lifelong consequences, such as a dislike for school, poor
self-esteem, social withdrawal, and difficulties with adult
relationships.
Considerable research has been undertaken to try to
understand why some children experience serious and
long-lasting difficulties in the area of peer relations. To
explore factors leading to peer difficulties, researchers
typically employ the sociometric method to identify children who are or are not successful with peers. In this
method, children in a classroom or a group are asked to
list children who they like most and those who they like
least. Children who receive many positive (“like most”)
nominations and few negative (“like least”) nominations
are classified as”popular;” those who receive few positive and few negative nominations are designated”neglected,” and those who receive few positive and many
negative nominations are classified as”rejected.”

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Children who have problems making friends, those
who are either “neglected” or “rejected” sociometrically,
often show deficits in social skills. One of the most common reasons for friendship problems is behavior that
annoys other children. Children, like adults, do not like
behavior that is bossy, self-centered, or disruptive. It is
simply not fun to play with someone who doesn’t share
or doesn’t follow the rules. Sometimes children who
have learning problems or attention problems can have
trouble making friends, because they find it hard to understand and follow the rules of games. Children who get
angry easily and lose their temper when things don’t go
their way can also have a hard time getting along with
others. Children who are rejected by peers often have
difficulties focusing their attention and controlling their
behavior. They may show high rates of noncompliance,
interference with others, or aggression (teasing or fighting). Peers often describe rejected classmates as disruptive, short-tempered, unattractive, and likely to brag, to
start fights, and to get in trouble with the teacher.
Not all aggressive children are rejected by their
peers. Children are particularly likely to become rejected
if they show a wide range of conduct problems, including disruptive, hyperactive, and disagreeable behaviors
in addition to physical aggression. Socially competent
children who are aggressive tend to use aggression in a
way that is accepted by peers (e.g., fighting back when
provoked), whereas the aggressive acts of rejected children include tantrums, verbal insults, cheating, or tattling. In addition, aggressive children are more likely to
be rejected if they are hyperactive, immature, and lacking in positive social skills.
Children can also have friendship problems because
they are very shy and feel uncomfortable and unsure of
themselves around others. Sometimes children are ignored
or teased by classmates because there is something “differ-

ent” about them that sets them apart from other children.
When children are shy in the classroom and ignored by
classmates, becoming classified as “neglected,” it does not
necessarily indicate deficits in social competence. Many
neglected children have friendships outside of the classroom setting, and their neglected status is simply a reflection of their quiet attitude and low profile in the classroom.
Developmentally, peer neglect is not a very stable classification, and many neglected children develop more confidence as they move into classrooms with more familiar or
more compatible peers. However, some shy children are
highly anxious socially, and uncomfortable around peers in
many situations. Shy, passive children who are actively disliked and rejected by classmates often become teased and
victimized. These children often do have deficits in core
areas of social competence that have a negative impact on
their social development. For example, many are emotionally dependent on adults, and immature in their social behavior. They may be inattentive, moody, depressed, or
emotionally volatile, making it difficult for them to sustain
positive play interactions with others.
The long-term consequences of sustained peer rejection can be quite serious. Often, deficits in social competence and peer rejection coincide with other emotional
and behavioral problems, including attention deficits, aggression, and depression. The importance of social competence and satisfying social relations is life-long. Studies of adults have revealed that friendship is a critical
source of social support that protects against the negative
effects of life stress. People with few friends are at elevated risk for depression and anxiety.
Childhood peer rejection predicts a variety of difficulties in later life, including school problems, mental
health disorders, and antisocial behavior. In fact, in one
study, peer rejection proved to be a more sensitive predictor of later mental health problems than school
records, achievement, and IQ scores or teacher ratings.
It appears, then, that positive peer relations play an
important role in supporting the process of healthy social
and emotional development. Problematic peer relations
are associated with both concurrent and future maladjustment of children, and hence warrant serious attention from
parents and professionals working with children. When
assessing the possible factors contributing to a child’s social difficulties and when planning remedial interventions,
it is important to understand developmental processes associated with social competence and peer relations.

Developmental changes and social
competence
The key markers of social competence listed in the
previous section are remarkably consistent across the de-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

599

Social competence

Evidence compiled from studies using child interviews, direct observations, and teacher ratings all suggest that popular children exhibit high levels of social
competence. They are friendly and cooperative and engage readily in conversation. Peers describe them as
helpful, nice, understanding, attractive, and good at
games. Popular and socially competent children are able
to consider others’ perspectives, can sustain their attention to the play task, and are able to “keep their cool” in
situations involving conflict. They are agreeable and
have good problem-solving skills. Socially competent
children are also sensitive to the nuances of “play etiquette.” They enter a group using diplomatic strategies,
such as commenting upon the ongoing activity and asking permission to join in. They uphold standards of equity and show good sportsmanship, making them good
companions and fun play partners.

Social competence

velopmental periods of the preschool years, middle
childhood, and adolescence. Across these developmental
periods, prosocial skills (friendly, cooperative, helpful
behaviors) and self-control skills (anger management,
negotiation skills, problem-solving skills) are key facets
of social competence. In addition, however, developmental changes occur in the structure and quality of peer interactions which affect the complexity of skills contributing to social competence. That is, as children grow,
their preferences for play change, and the thinking skills
and language skills that provide a foundation for social
competence also change. Hence, the kinds of interactions that children have with peers change qualitatively
and quantitatively with development.
The ways in which children spend their time together, for example, changes with development. During the
preschool years, social competence involves the ability to
separate from parents and engage with peers in shared
play activities, particularly fantasy play. As preschool
children are just learning to coordinate their social behavior, their interactions are often short and marked by frequent squabbles, and friendships are less stable than at
later developmental stages. In addition, physical roughand-tumble play is common, particularly among boys.
By grade school, children begin to develop an interest in sports, structured board games, and group games
with complex sets of rules. Being able to understand and
follow game rules and being able to handle competition
in appropriate ways (e.g., being a good sport) become
important skills for social competence. Children play
primarily in same-sex groups of friends, and expect more
stability in their friendships. Loyalty and dependability
become important qualities of good friends.
During the preadolescent and early adolescent years,
communication (including sending notes, calling on the
phone, and “hanging out”) becomes a major focus for
peer interactions. Increasingly, social competence involves the willingness and ability to share thoughts and
feelings with one another, especially for girls. When
adolescent friends squabble, their conflicts typically center around issues such as gossiping, disclosing secrets, or
loyalty and perceived betrayal. It is at this stage that
friends and romantic partners consistently rival parents
as the primary sources of intimacy and social support.
In addition to developmental changes in the content
and focus of peer relations, development brings changes
in the structure of peer relations. During the preschool
and early grade school years, children are primarily focused on group acceptance and having companions to
spend time with and play with. However, during the middle to late grade school years, children begin to distinguish “regular” friends from “best” friends. The estab600

lishment of close, best friendships is an important developmental milestone. That is, in addition to gaining acceptance from a group of peers, one of the hallmarks of social competence is the ability to form and maintain satisfying close friendships. Many of the positive characteristics that promote popularity (such as cooperativeness,
friendliness, and consideration for others) also assist children in developing and maintaining friendships. Friendships emerge when children share similar activities and
interests and, in addition, when they develop a positive
and mutual bond between them. Group acceptance and
close friendships follow different timetables and serve
different developmental functions, with the need for
group acceptance emerging during the early grade school
years and filling a need for belonging, and the need for
close friends emerging in preadolescence to meet newfound needs for affection, alliance, and intimacy outside
the family. Key features of close friendships are reciprocity and similarity, mutual intimacy, and social support.
A third major shift in the complexity of peer relations involves the changing role of cliques and crowds.
Grade school children often have little conception of peer
groups. For example, when we interviewed fifth graders
and asked them about groups at their school, a typical
reply was, “what do you mean, reading groups?” In contrast, by eighth grade, children had distinct ideas about
groups at their school, responding to our questions with
labels such as”the jocks, the brains, the nerds.” The
recognition of cliques and crowds as organizational structures of the peer group usually emerges during early adolescence. In part, the understanding of cliques reflects a
cognitive advance, as children in adolescence are able to
use formal operational thinking to consider abstract ideas
such as “cliques” and apply them to their thinking about
peers. In part, the rise of cliques in the organizational
structure of peer groups reflects the structure of American
schools, which typically transition from small elementary
schools to large middle schools or junior high schools
around sixth or seventh grade. The change in the school
context has a large impact on the nature of the peer
group, as the typical middle school or junior high school
peer group involves a very large and diverse set of peers.
In the context of this large group, children associate with
smaller networks of familiar classmates. Typically, the
grouping into friendship networks takes place on the
basis of shared interests, activities, and attitudes. Children
in the same friendship networks influence each other in
matters of dress, behavior, and language, leading to identifiable characteristics of group members that become the
basis for group labels (e.g., jocks or brains).
From an emotional standpoint, adolescents are focused on developing a sense of themselves and in sorting
out how their identities fit (or do not fit) with the expecta-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The increased level of social awareness and selfconsciousness that accompanies the advanced social reasoning of adolescence and the increased importance that
adolescents place on peer acceptance may strengthen
the impact of perceived peer rejection on emotional adjustment and self-concept. Social ostracism or self-imposed isolation my also become a more important determinant of peer rejection during adolescence than at
younger ages.
At all ages, the treatment a child receives from peers
may influence his or her social adaptation. Once rejected
by peers, disliked children may find themselves excluded
from peer activities and exposed to ostracism, or more severely to victimization by peers. Peers may develop negatively biased attitudes and expectations for rejected children and treat these children differently (with more counteraggression and hostility) than they treat their well-accepted peers. Children who are particularly stressed by
the academic demands of school, such as those aggressive-rejected children with attentional deficits or hyperactive behaviors, may be at increased risk for negative interactions with teachers and peers. Over time, teachers tend
to become less positive and less contingent in their reactions to these problematic students, decreasing their effectiveness at managing social behavior.
During the preadolescent and later adolescent years,
the combination of ostracism from conventional peer
groups and the evolution of peer group cliques and crowds
can be problematic for rejected children. That is, adolescents who feel pushed out of the conventional peer groups
may begin to affiliate with defiant peers. As cliques of deviant peers form in adolescence, these groups may begin
to exert a strong influence on children, shaping their attitudes and social behaviors and increasing the likelihood of
future antisocial and deviant behavior. Particularly in adolescence, youth turn to their peer groups for guidance in
matters of dress code, social behavior, social attitudes, and
identity formation. In peer networks containing many
members who exhibit high rates of aggression, group
norms are likely to be accepting of aggression. Hence, although affiliations with deviant peers may provide com-

panionship and support, the”cost” of such affiliations may
be great in terms of their negative influence exacerbating
antisocial behavior and attitudes. Preadolescent children
who form friendships with antisocial peers appear to be at
heightened risk for later antisocial behavior, including
delinquency, drug use, and school dropout.

Family contributions to social competence
Because the family is the primary context for social
development, there are a number of ways in which family
interaction patterns may help or hinder the development
of children’s social competence. Some researchers have
speculated that the origins of social competence can be
found in infancy, in the quality of the parent-child attachment relationship. Studies have shown that babies
whose parents are consistent and sensitive in their responses to distress are less irritable, less anxious, and better emotionally regulated. By contrast, parents who are
inconsistent and insensitive to their infants’ signals are
more likely to have anxious, irritable babies who are difficult to soothe. These children may learn both to model
their parents’ insensitivity and to rely on intrusive, demanding behavior of their own in order to get attention. If
they then generalize these socially incompetent behaviors
to their peer interactions, peer rejection may result.
As children get older, family interaction styles and
the ways in which parents discipline may play a primary
role in the development of noncompliant or aggressive
behaviors in children. In families where parents are extremely demanding and use inconsistent, harsh, and
punitive discipline strategies, family interaction patterns
are frequently characterized by escalation and conflict,
and children often exhibit behavior problems. When
children generalize the aggressive and oppositional behavior that they have learned at home to their interactions with peers, other children often reject them. Indeed, research has revealed that aggressive behavior is
the common link between harsh, inconsistent discipline
and rejection by peers.
By contrast, parents of popular children are typically more positive and less demanding with their children
than parents of unpopular children. In addition, parents
of popular children “set a good example” by modeling
appropriate social interactions, and assist their children
by arranging opportunities for peer interaction, carefully
supervising these experiences, and providing helpful
feedback about conflict resolution and making friends.

Child characteristics and social competence
In addition to family interaction patterns and various aspects of the parent-child relationship, children’s

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

601

Social competence

tions of others and the social niches available to them. As
a correlate to identity formation, adolescents become
keenly aware of group peer norms and increasingly seek
to associate with peers and use peer standards to evaluate
their own and other’s social behavior. Whereas in grade
school peer status referred to one’s state of acceptance or
rejection from the classroom group, by adolescence one’s
peer status is complicated by the nature of the various
groups toward which one may seek and attain (or be refused) membership status. In other words, in addition to
finding friends, adolescents often worry about their placement in the larger social structure of cliques and crowds.

Social competence

own thoughts, feelings, and attitudes may influence
their social behavior. Research has revealed that many
rejected children make impulsive, inaccurate, and incomplete judgments about how to behave in social situations and are lacking in social problem-solving skills.
They may make numerous errors in processing social
information, including misinterpretation of other people’s motives and behavior, setting social goals for
themselves that are unrealistic or inappropriate, and
making poor decisions about their own conduct in social
situations. For example, aggressive children are more
likely to interpret an accidental push or bump from a
peer as intentionally hostile, and respond accordingly.
Similarly, socially incompetent children are often more
interested in “getting even” with peers for injustices
than they are in finding positive solutions to social problems, and expect that aggressive, coercive strategies will
lead to desired outcomes.
Many children who are rejected by peers have lower
self-esteem, feel lonelier, and are more dissatisfied with
their social situations than are average or popular children. These feelings can cause them to give up and avoid
social situations, which can in turn exacerbate their peer
problems. Interestingly, not all rejected children feel
badly about their social difficulties. Studies have shown
that aggressive-rejected children, who tend to blame outside factors for their peer problems, are less likely to express distress than withdrawn-rejected children, who
often attribute their problems to themselves.

Assessing social competence
There is an important difference between not being
“popular” and having friendship problems. Some children are outgoing and have many friends. Other children
are quite content with just a good friend or two. Either
one of these friendship patterns is fine. Distinguishing
“normative” friendship problems from problematic peer
relations that signal serious deficits in social competence
is an important goal of assessment. There are several key
signs that a child’s peer difficulties may be more serious
and long-lasting rather than temporary. First, the nature
of the child’s social behavior is important. If children behave aggressively with peers, act bossy and domineering, or are disruptive and impulsive at school, they are
more likely to have stable and long-lasting peer difficulties than are children who are simply shy. Children who
display aggressive or disruptive behavior often have
many discouraging experiences at school, including discipline problems and learning difficulties as well as poor
peer relations. School adjustment can be a downhill slide
for these children as teachers may get discouraged and
peers may get angered by their behaviors. Peers may attempt to “get back” at these children by teasing, which
602

only increases the frustrations and helplessness experienced by aggressive, disruptive children.
Second, children who are actively disliked, teased,
or ostracized by peers are at more risk than children who
are simply ignored. It is not necessary for a child to be
popular in order to gain the advantages of peer support.
When children are ignored by peers and are neither disliked nor liked, teachers and parents can take steps to
foster friendship development and peer support. When
children are actively disliked by peers and the victims of
teasing or ostracism, the task is harder for parents and
teachers and the likelihood of the child reestablishing
positive peer relations without help is slimmer.
Third, the stability and chronicity of peer problems
should be considered. It is not unusual for children to experience short-term social difficulties when they are
moving into new peer situations, such as a new school or
a new classroom. Peer problems may also emerge if children are distressed about other changes in their lives,
such as a reaction to parental conflict or the birth of a
sibling. When peer problems emerge at a time that corresponds to other family or situational changes, they may
serve as signals to let parents and teachers know that the
child needs extra support at that time. When peer problems have been stable and have existed for a long time,
more extensive intervention focused on improving peer
relations may be needed.
There is a variety of methods available for the assessment of social competence. When choosing a particular assessment strategy, it is important to consider the nature of a particular child’s problem. Some children have
difficulty with all types of social relationships, while others do well in their neighborhoods or in one-on-one
friendships but experience problems with the peer group
at school. When problems occur in the school setting,
teachers and other school personnel who have opportunities to see children interacting in several peer group situations (such as the classroom, playground, and lunchroom)
are often the best first step in assessment. Teachers can
often provide information about how children treat and
are treated by peers, and can also offer opinions about
how typical or unusual a child’s peer problems are relative to others of the same age. Teacher assessments can
include behavioral checklists and rating scales and direct
observations of specific social behaviors.
Similarly, parents can also provide information about
children’s social competence. Parents can help to identify
problem behaviors such as aggression, withdrawal, and
noncompliance that may interfere with social skills. In
addition, parents are usually more aware than teachers of
their children’s social activities outside of school, such as
their participation in sports, clubs, or hobbies.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

A third approach to assessment of social competence involves children’s self-reports. Although input
from parents, teachers, and peers can provide valuable
insight into children’s social behavior and their status
within the peer group, information regarding children’s
thoughts, feelings, and perceptions of their social situations can be obtained only by asking the children themselves. Depending upon the age of the child, information
about social competence can be obtained through the use
of questionnaires and rating scales that measure children’s self-perceptions of their peer relations, the use of
stories and hypothetical social situations to elicit information about the child’s social reasoning, or simply talking with children to determine their perspectives on their
social situations.
Because children may have different experiences in
different kinds of peer settings and because no one particular method of assessment is entirely reliable or complete, it is desirable to use a variety of sources when attempting to assess children’s social competence.
Teacher, parent, peer, and self-reports may yield distinct
but complementary information, and hence, by gathering
multiple perspectives, a more complete picture of a
child’s social strengths and weaknesses can be obtained.

Interventions to promote social
competence
Different strategies may be needed to help children
develop social competencies and establish positive peer
relations depending upon the age of the child and the
type of peer problem being experienced. Different children have different needs when it comes to helping them
get along better with others and making friends. The age
of the child, the kinds of behaviors that are part of the

problem, the reasons for the friendship problem—all of
these may affect the development of the helping strategy.
One strategy involves social skill training. Observations have revealed that children who are well-liked by
peers typically show helpful, courteous, and considerate
behavior. The purpose of social skill training is to help
unpopular children learn to treat their peers in positive
ways. The specific skills taught in different programs
vary depending upon the age and type of child involved.
Commonly taught skills include helping, sharing, and
cooperation. Often children are taught how to enter a
group, how to be a good group participant, how to be a
fair player (e.g., following rules, taking turns), and how
to have a conversation with peers. The skills might also
include anger management, negotiation, and conflict resolution skills. Problem solving skills (e.g., identifying
the problem, considering alternative solutions, choosing
a solution and making a plan) are often included in social skill training programs. Sometimes social skill training is done individually with children, but often it is
done in a small group. A particular skill concept is discussed, and children may watch a short film or hear a
story that illustrates the usefulness of the skill. They then
have the opportunity to practice the skill during activities
or role-plays with other children in the group. A trained
group leader helps guide the children in their use of the
skill and provides support and positive feedback to help
children become more natural and spontaneous in socially skillful behavior.
Another intervention strategy focuses on helping
children who are having trouble getting along with others because of angry, aggressive, or bossy behavior. It
can be difficult to suppress aggressive and disruptive behaviors in peer settings for several reasons. For one
thing, these behaviors often “work” in the sense that
they can be instrumental in achieving desired goals. By
complaining loudly, hitting, or otherwise using force or
noise, children may be able to get access to a toy they
want or they may be able to get peers to stop doing
something noxious to them. In this type of situation, an
adult’s expressed disapproval may suppress the behavior, but the behavior is likely to emerge again in situations where an adult supervisor is not present. Often
contracts and point systems are used to suppress aggressive behavior and bossiness; however, positive skill
training must be used in conjunction with behavior
management in order to provide the child with alternative skills to use in situations requiring negotiations
with peers. Often parents are included in programs to
help children develop better anger management skills
and to help children reduce fighting. Trained counselors, educators, or psychologists work with parents to
help them find positive discipline strategies and positive

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

603

Social competence

Because they do not have access to the full range of
situations in which children interact, however, teachers
and parents may not always be the best source of information on children’s peer problems. In some cases, it is
most helpful to get information directly from peers
themselves. One method of obtaining such information
is the use of sociometric ratings and nominations. With
these procedures, all of the children in a classroom are
asked to rate how much they like to play with or spend
time with each of their classmates. In addition, they
nominate specific peers with whom they particularly like
or dislike, and may be asked to identify peers who exhibit particular behavioral characteristics (e.g., nice, aggressive, shy, etc.). The sociometric method, although cumbersome to administer, identifies children who are popular, rejected, and neglected by their peers more accurately than parent or teacher reports, and provides useful
information about the reasons for peer dislike.

Social influence

communication skills to promote child anger management and conflict resolution skills.
A third helping strategy focuses on finding a good
social “niche” for the child. Large, unstructured peer
group settings (such as recess) are particularly difficult
situations for many of the children who have peer problems. These children need a more structured, smaller
peer interaction setting in which an adult’s support is
available to guide positive peer interaction. Finding a
good social “niche” for some children can be a difficult
task, but an important one. Sometimes a teacher can organize cooperative learning groups that help an isolated
child make friends in the classroom. Sometimes parents
can help by inviting potential friends over to play or getting their child involved in a social activity outside of
school that is rewarding (such as scouting, church group,
sports groups). Providing positive opportunities for
friendship development is important, as it provides children with an appropriate and positive learning environment for the development of social competence.
Janet A. Welsh, Ph.D., Karen L. Bierman, Ph.D.
Further Reading
Asher, Steven R., et al. Children’s Social Development: Information for Teachers and Parents. Urbana, IL: ERIC
Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early Childhood Education, University of Illinois, 1987.
——— and J. D. Coie. (eds.) Peer Rejection in Childhood.
Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
——— and John M. Gottman. (eds.) The Development of Children’s Friendships. Cambridge, Eng.: Cambridge University Press, 1981.
Berndt, Thomas J., and Gary W. Ladd. (eds.) Peer Relationships in Child Development. New York: Wiley, 1989.
Bierman, Karen L. “Improving the Peer Relationships of Rejected Children.” In Lahey, B., and A. Kazdin (eds.), Advances in Clinical Child Psychology. New York: Plenum,
l989, pp. 53-84.
Bukowski, William M., Andrew Newcomb, and Willard W.
Hartup. (eds.) The Company They Keep: Friendship During Childhood and Adolescence. New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1996.
Cicchetti, Dante, and William M. Bukowski. “Developmental
Processes in Peer Relations and Psychopathology.” Development and Psychopathology 7, 1995, pp. 587-89.
Coie, J. D., and G. K. Koeppl. “Adapting Intervention to the
Problems of Aggressive and Disruptive Children.” In
Asher, S. R., & J. D. Coie. (eds.) Peer Rejection in Childhood. New York: Cambridge University Press, l990, pp.
275-308.
Crick, N. R., and K. A. Dodge. “A Review and Reformulation
of Social Information-Processing Mechanisms in Children’s Social Adjustment.” Psychological Bulletin 115,
1994, pp. 74-101.
604

Dodge, K. A., and R. R. Murphy. “The Assessment of Social
Competence in Adolescents.” Advances in Child Behavior
Analysis and Therapy 3, 1984, pp. 61-96.
Dodge, K. A. “Problems in Social Relationships.” In Mash, E.,
and R. Barkley (eds.) Treatment of Childhood Disorders.
New York: Guilford Press, l989, pp. 222-44.
Hartup, Willard W. “Social Relationships and Their Developmental Significance.” American Psychologist 44, 1989,
pp. 120-26.
Olweus, D. “Victimization by Peers: Antecedents and LongTerm Outcomes.” In Rubin, Kenneth H., and J.B.
Asendorpf (eds.) Social Withdrawal, Inhibition and Shyness in Childhood. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1993, pp. 315344.
Parke, R. D., and G. W. Ladd. Family-Peer Relationships:
Modes of Linkage. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1992.
Parker, J., and S. R. Asher. “Peer Acceptance and Later Personal Adjustment: Are Low-Accepted Children at Risk?”
Psychological Bulletin 102, no. 3, 1987, pp. 357-89.
Pepler, Debra J., and Kenneth H. Rubin. (eds.) The Development and Treatment of Childhood Aggression. Hillsdale,
NJ: L. Erlbaum, 1991.
Rubin, K. H., and S. L Stewart. “Social Withdrawal.” In Mash,
E.J., and R. A.Barkley. (eds.) Child Psychopathology.
New York: Guilford, 1996, pp. 277-310.
Schneider, B., K. H. Rubin, and J. E. Ledingham, (eds.) Children’s Peer Relations: Issues in Assessment and Intervention. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1985.

Social influence
The influence of others on an individual’s behavior.

Human behavior is influenced by other people in
countless ways and on a variety of levels. The mere presence of others—as co-actors or spectators—can stimulate or improve one’s performance of a task, a process
known as social facilitation (and also observed in nonhuman species). However, the increased level of arousal
responsible for this phenomenon can backfire and create
social interference, impairing performance on complex,
unfamiliar, and difficult tasks.
Overt, deliberate persuasion by other people can
cause us to change our opinions and/or behavior. However, a great deal of social influence operates more subtly in the form of norms—acquired social rules that people are generally unaware of until they are violated. For
example, every culture has a norm for “personal
space”—the physical distance maintained between
adults. Violation of norms generally makes people uncomfortable, while adherence to them provides security
and confidence in a variety of social situations. Norms
may be classified as one of two types: descriptive and
injunctive. Descriptive norms are simply based on what

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Social influence

a majority of people do, while injunctive norms involve
a value judgment about what is proper and improper behavior.
Both conformity and compliance are attempts to
adhere to social norms—conformity occurs in response
to unspoken group pressure, as opposed to compliance,
which results from a direct request. Research has
shown that conformity is influenced by the ambiguity
of a situation (people are more apt to go along with the
majority when they are uncertain about which course of
action to pursue), the size of the majority, and the personal characteristics of the people involved, including
their self-esteem and their status within the group. A
person may conform by acting in accordance with
group norms while privately disagreeing with them
(public conformity) or by actually changing his or her
opinions to coincide with those of the group (private
acceptance).
In contrast to compliance, which characterizes behavior toward those who make direct requests but have
no authority over us, obedience is elicited in response
to a specific demand by an authority figure. The most
famous experiment involving obedience was conducted by Stanley Milgram in the early 1960s at Yale University. Forty men and women were instructed to administer electric shocks to another person, supposedly
as part of an experiment in learning. (In fact, there
were actually no shocks administered, and responses
were faked by the “victim,” who was part of the experiment.) When the scientist in charge directed the subjects to administer increasingly severe shocks, most of
them, while uncomfortable, did so in spite of the apparent pain and protests of the supposed victim. This
experiment—which is often referred to in connection
with German obedience to authority during the Nazi
era—gained widespread attention as evidence of the
extent to which people will forfeit their own judgment,
will, and values in order to follow orders by an authority figure (65 percent of the volunteers, when asked to
do so, administered the maximum level of shock possible). In variations on this experiment, Milgram found
that factors affecting obedience included the reputation
of the authority figure and his proximity to the subject
(obedience decreased when instructions were issued
by phone), as well as the presence of others who disobey (the most powerful factor in reducing the level of
obedience).
Another type of social influence that can lead normal people to engage in cruel or antisocial behavior
is participation in a crowd or mob. Being part of a
crowd can allow a person’s identity to become submerged in a group, a process known as deindividuation. Contributing factors include anonymity, which

Cal Ripkin, who broke the record for consecutive major
league baseball games played, waves to his home crowd.
The home advantage in sports is due to the social influence
of the crowd. (Archive Photos, Inc. Reproduced with
permission.)

brings with it a reduction of accountability; a high
level of arousal; and a shifting of attention from oneself to external events, resulting in reduced self-awareness. The so-called “herd mentality” that results weakens people’s normal restraints against impulsive behavior, increases their sensitivity to environmental
stimuli, and reduces their abilities to think rationally
and fear censure by others.
The relatively new field of environmental psychology investigates the ways in which human behavior is affected by proximity to others in urban environments,
most notably the effects of noise and overcrowding. Living in high-density environments has been associated
with feelings of helplessness resulting from lack of control and predictability in one’s social interactions.
Further Reading
Freedman, J. L., D. O. Sears, and J. M. Carlsmith. Social Psychology. 4th ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1981.
Milgram, Stanley. Obedience to Authority: An Experimental
View. New York: Harper and Row, 1974.
Paulus, P. B., ed. Psychology of Group Influence. 2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1989.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

605

Social learning theory

Social learning theory
An approach to personality that emphasizes the interaction between personal traits and environment
and their mediation by cognitive processes.

Social learning theory has its roots in the behaviorist notion of human behavior as being determined by
learning, particularly as shaped by reinforcement in the
form of rewards or punishment. Early research in behaviorism conducted by Ivan Pavlov, John Watson,
and B. F. Skinner used animals in a laboratory. Subsequently, researchers became dissatisfied with the capacity of their findings to fully account for the complexities
of human personality. Criticism centered particularly on
the fact that behaviorism’s focus on observable behaviors left out the role played by cognition.
The first major theory of social learning, that of Julian B. Rotter, argued that cognition, in the form of expectations, is a crucial factor in social learning. In his influential 1954 book, Social Learning and Clinical Psychology, Rotter claimed that behavior is determined by
two major types of “expectancy”: the expected outcome
of a behavior and the value a person places on that outcome. In Applications of a Social Learning Theory of
Personality (1972), Rotter, in collaboration with June
Chance and Jerry Phares, described a general theory of
personality with variables based on the ways that different individuals habitually think about their experiences.
One of the major variables was I-E, which distinguished
“internals,” who think of themselves as controlling
events, from “externals,” who view events as largely outside their control. Correlations have since been found between I-E orientations and a variety of behaviors, ranging
from job performance to attitudes toward one’s health.
The social learning theories of Albert Bandura
emphasize the reciprocal relationship among cognition,
behavior, and environment, for which Bandura coined
the term reciprocal determinism. Hostile thoughts can
result in hostile behavior, for example, which can effect
our environment by making others hostile and evoking
additional hostile thoughts. Thus, not only does our environment influence our thoughts and behavior—our
thoughts and behavior also play a role in determining
our environment. Bandura is especially well known for
his research on the importance of imitation and reinforcement in learning. His work on modeling has been
influential in the development of new therapeutic approaches, especially the methods used in cognitive-behavior therapy. Bandura also expanded on Rotter’s notion of expectancy by arguing that our expectations
about the outcome of situations are heavily influenced
by whether or not we think we will succeed at the things
606

we attempt. Bandura introduced the term self-efficacy
for this concept, arguing that it has a high degree of influence not only on our expectations but also on our performance itself.
Most recently, Walter Mischel, building on the work
of both Rotter and Bandura, has framed the determinants
of human behavior in particular situations in terms of
“person variables.” These include competencies (those
things we know we can do); perceptions (how we perceive our environment); expectations (what we expect
will be the outcome of our behavior); subject values (our
goals and ideals); and self-regulation and plans (our
standards for ourselves and plans for reaching our goals).
Further Reading
Bandura, Albert. Social Learning Theory. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1971.
———. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social
Cognitive Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1986.

Social perception
The processes through which people form impressions of others and interpret information about
them.

Researchers have confirmed the conventional wisdom that first impressions are important. Studies show
that first impressions are easily formed, difficult to
change, and have a long-lasting influence. Rather than
absorbing each piece of new information about an individual in a vacuum, it is common for people to invoke a
preexisting prototype or schema based on some aspect of
the person (for example, “grandmother” or “graduate
student”), modifying it with specific information about
the particular individual to arrive at an overall first impression. One term for this process is schema-plus-correction. It can be dangerous because it allows people to
infer many things from a very limited amount of information, which partially explains why first impressions
are often wrong.
If there is no special reason to think negatively
about a person, one’s first impression of that person will
normally be positive, as people tend to give others the
benefit of the doubt. However, people are especially attentive to negative factors, and if these are present, they
will outweigh the positive ones in generating impressions. One reason first impressions are so indelible is
that people have a tendency to interpret new information
about a person in a light that will reinforce their first impression. They also tend to remember the first impres-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Besides impression formation, the other key area focused on in the study of social perception is attribution,
the thought processes we employ in explaining the behavior of other people and our own as well. The most
fundamental observation we make about a person’s behavior is whether it is due to internal or external causes
(Is the behavior determined by the person’s own characteristics or by the situation in which it occurs?). We tend
to base this decision on a combination of three factors.
Consensus refers to whether other people exhibit similar
behavior; consistency refers to whether the behavior occurs repeatedly; and distinctiveness is concerned with
whether the behavior occurs in other, similar situations.
Certain cognitive biases tend to influence whether
people attribute behavior to internal or external causes.
When we observe the behavior of others, our knowledge
of the external factors influencing that behavior is limited, which often leads us to attribute it to internal factors
(a tendency known as the fundamental attribution error).
However, we are aware of numerous external factors that
play a role in our own behavior. This fact, combined
with a natural desire to think well of ourselves, produces
actor-observer bias, a tendency to attribute our own behavior (especially when inappropriate or unsuccessful)
to external factors.
Further Reading

scientific measures and analysis of human behavior, an
emphasis on which social psychologists continue to
focus. Social psychologists also study the way individuals behave in relationship to others, and, alternatively,
how groups act to shape the behavior of individuals.
As do other scientists, social psychologists develop
a theory and then design experiments to test it. For example, Leon Feistinger, an American social psychologist, theorized that a person feels uncomfortable when
confronted with information that contradicts something
he or she already believes. He labeled this uneasiness
cognitive dissonance. Other social psychologists subsequently conducted research to confirm Feistinger’s theory by studying individuals who believed themselves to
be failures. The psychologists found that such people
avoid success, even when it would be easily achieved,
because it would conflict with their firmly held belief
that they are unsuccessful.
Social psychologists work in academic settings,
teaching and conducting research. They also work with
businesses and other organizations to design personnel
management programs based on their knowledge of interpersonal relations. Social psychologists also contribute their expertise to market research, government
agencies, and educational institutions.
Further Reading
Argyle, Michael. The Social Psychology of Everyday Life. New
York: Routledge, 1992.
Aronson, Elliot. The Social Animal. New York: W.H. Freeman,
1995.
Bandura, Albert. Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A
Social and Cognitive Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1986.
Baron, Robert A. Exploring Social Psychology. Boston, MA:
Allyn and Bacon, 1989.

Zebrowitz, Leslie. Social Perception. Pacific Grove, CA:
Brooks/Cole Publishing Co., 1990.

Socialization
The process by which a person learns to conform
individual behavior and responses to the norms
and values of society.

Social psychology
The study of the psychology of interpersonal relationships.

Social psychology is the study of human interaction,
including communication, cooperation, competition,
leadership, and attitude development. Although the first
textbooks on the subject of social psychology were published in the early 1900s, much of the foundation for social psychology studied in the 1990s is based on the
work of the behavioral psychologists of the 1930s. Behavioral psychologists were among the first to call for

Socialization is a lifelong process that begins during
infancy in the complex interaction between parent and
child. As parents respond to a baby’s physical requirements for food and shelter, they are also beginning to
teach the baby what to expect from their environment
and how to communicate their needs. The action-reaction cycle of smiling, cooing, and touching is a child’s
earliest interaction with “society.” It is believed that
these early interactions during infancy play a major role

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

607

Socialization

sion, or overall schema, better than any subsequent corrections. Thus if a person whom one thinks of as competent makes a mistake, it will tend to be overlooked and
eventually forgotten, and the original impression is the
one that will prevail. Conversely, one will tend to forget
or undervalue good work performed by someone initially
judged to be incompetent. In addition, people often treat
each other in ways that tend to elicit behavior that conforms to their impressions of each other.

Socialization
As children are socialized, they learn which behaviors are acceptable and which are unacceptable. Boys are often encouraged
to imitate their fathers’ activities, as this boy is doing. (David Frazier. Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

in future social adjustment. Consistent, responsive care
helps lead to healthy relationships with others and normal personal development. Caretakers who neglect an
infant’s needs or otherwise stifle early attempts at communication can cause serious damage to the child’s future social interactions.
The family is the most influential socialization
force. Parents, grandparents, and siblings all transmit to
infants and young children what they consider to be important values, behavior, skills, and attitudes. Household
rules govern behavior, interpersonal behavior serves as a
model for interactions with outside people, and socially
valued qualities such as generosity and caring are
learned through example within the home and in the culture. As children grow and interact more with the environment outside the family home, others begin to play
important roles in the socialization process. Friends, institutions such as church and school, the media (particularly television) and co-workers all become important
factors in shaping a person’s attitudes and behavior.
Researchers have theorized that socialization is a
complex process that involves both personal and environmental factors. For example, studies of aggressive
608

tendencies in children have pointed out that certain children are more influenced than others when exposed to
television violence or aggressive behavior by authority
figures in the home. Some blind and deaf children display aggressive behavior such as stamping feet or yelling
even though they have never had the opportunity to see
or hear such displays of temper. Thus, it has been concluded that genetic factors must also be considered part
of the socialization process.
Studies of sex-type models also point to this complex interaction between environmental and genetic factors. While many researchers believe that most of the
stereotypical differences between boys and girls are invalid, some do appear significant. For example, boys
tend to perform better on tests involving spatial relationships, and girls tend to score better on tests involving
verbal skills. There is such an overlap among boys and
girls, even on these tests, that it would be impossible to
predict the scores of an individual boy or girl. It is believed, however, that perceived differences often affect
the behavior of one of the most influential socialization
forces of children—teachers. Some teachers reinforce
the male image of dominance and independence by re-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

to the biological need to continue the human gene pool.
While this is almost certainly true to some extent, many
psychologists and those in the various fields of social science argue otherwise. They point out that non-genetic
mothers in contemporary society, for example, adoptive
parents and step-mothers, demonstrate a bond just as
deep as those between genetic mothers and their children.

Further Reading

Sociobiologists have also tried to explain the prevalence of gender stereotypes across different cultures. As
children approach school age inWestern culture, their experiences become more social and less domestic as they
spend a great deal of time away from home with people
other than their parents. During this time, children start
to identify with their same-sex peers and learn stereotypical gender roles whether or not these roles are enforced
in the home. Sociobiologists believe the current trend to
avoid gender-marking is a wasted effort since gender
roles are an intractable part of human nature.

Clark, John, ed. The Mind: Into the Inner World. New York:
Torstar Books, 1986.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. Glenview, IL: Scott,
Foresman, 1988.

Sociobiology
A term coined by the eminent entomologist Edward O. Wilson to define a field of study combining biology and social sciences.

In his 1975 work, Sociobiology: The New Synthesis,
entomologist Edward O. Wilson first coined the term
“sociobiology” to create a new field of study combining
biology and social sciences, especially anthropology and
sociology. Sociobiologists study the biological nature of
human behavior and personality according to the tenet
that all social behavior has a biological basis.
The field of sociobiology has not been widely accepted by contemporary theorists of personality and culture. The trend of social thought for several decades has
been that humans are by and large responsible for their
personal behaviors and for the ways they interact with
others and with society as a whole. Wilson and other sociobiological theorists consider many human behaviors
to be genetically based, including aggression, motherchild bond, language, the taboo against incest, sexual division of labor, altruism, allegiance, conformity, xenophobia, genocide, ethics, love, spite, and other emotions.
Traditional social scientists, however, debate sociobiology. Feminists have been particularly critical of the
new field’s view on gender roles. Feminists believe that
gender roles are culturally determined. Sociobiologists
see gender roles as basic human traits and point out that
in almost no culture in the history of the world have
women, for example, taken the role of sexual aggressor
or exhibited a propensity to collect harems of sexually
active men—two human traits that appear in nearly
every culture.
Sociobiologists point to the mother-child bond as
one of the prime examples of genetically based behavior.
According to sociobiologists, the attachment a mother
feels for her infant is a genetically programmed response

Young boys tend to be aggressive in their play,
while young girls tend to be reflective, or, to use a term
widely applied in sociobiology, coy. This tendency is
also seen in other primates and occurs across a variety of
human cultures. It is therefore logical to assume that a
young boy is naturally predisposed to aggressive behavior while a young girl is naturally predisposed to less violent modes of play. It is also widely held that boys and
girls have different intellectual capacities, with boys
being more adept at spatial reasoning and girls at verbal.
There are reams of standardized test score data backing
up such assertions, but it is not clear whether such differences are genetically determined.
Sociobiologists do not claim that aggression in males
is acceptable. Even though male domination seems to be
the predominant form of social organization, organized
societies are not in any way obliged to defer to it. Social
structures have for thousands of years modified what
might be considered “natural” behaviors. Murder is an
example. In preliterate societies murder is sanctioned
under a variety of conditions. Human sacrifice, for example, used to play a large role in preliterate societies. But
as societies develop, these “natural” tendencies are, necessarily, curbed. Instinctive behavior is replaced by social
behavior because a culture sees social behavior as more
desirable. While sociobiology may predict patterns of behavior in young children, there is no reason to believe
that these tendencies cannot or should not be altered.
If there is any stage of life that most exemplifies the
ideas of sociobiologists, it is adolescence. During this
period, hormones are changing the body at a pace unmatched during any time in life, and with those changes
in physical appearance, behavior also changes. Boys and

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

609

Sociobiology

sponding more to boys and demanding more from them
in the classroom. Girls are often rewarded for passive,
less demanding behavior. Similarly, some parents respond differently to sons and daughters, encouraging
stereotypical behavior and traditionally male or female
hobbies and careers. Media portrayals of one-dimensional characters can also perpetuate sex role stereotypes.

Somnambulism

girls take on social roles during adolescence that are radically different from their roles as children.
Some sociobiologists believe that many of the problems adolescents face in constructing their adult identities have a basis in evolution. There is increasing evidence, for instance, that certain adolescents are genetically predisposed to fall into clinical depressions. Genetic research has shown that many people suffering
depression share a genetic abnormality that may only
“turn on” if confronted with certain overwhelming social
problems such as those faced by adolescents. There is
also evidence that a predisposition to drugs and alcohol
dependency is genetically determined. Recent studies
have found links between several biological functions
and anti-social and criminal behavior among adolescents. Included in this list are a slowly developing frontal
lobe system in the brain, a variety of genes, a faulty autonomic nervous system, abnormal blood sugar levels,
deviant brain waves, and hyperactivity. So, while specific behaviors are not linked to a specific gene or to evolutionary adaptation, a propensity to behave in a certain
way, in the absence of more socially acceptable alternatives, may have a partial foundation in biology.
Further Reading
Wilson, Edward. Sociobiology—the New Synthesis. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1975
de Wal, Frans B.M. “The Biological Basis of Behavior.” The
Chronicle of Higher Education, June 14, 1996, p. B1.
Horgan, John. “The New Social Darwinists.” Scientific American, October, 1995, p. 174.
———. “Revisiting Old Battlefields.” Scientific American,
April 1994, p. 36.
“Irven DeVore.” Omni (interview) June 1993, p. 69.
Laying, Anthony. “Why Don’t We Act Like the Opposite
Sex?” USA Today, January 1993, p. 87.

Somnambulism
Also known as sleepwalking, a common disorder
among children that involves getting out of bed
and moving about while still asleep.

Somnambulism, or sleepwalking, affects an estimated 15% of children in the early school years. It is similar
to pavor nocturnus (night terrors) in that it occurs during the non-dreaming stage of sleep, usually within an
hour or two of going to bed. The sleepwalking child
feels an intense need to take action and may appear alert,
purposeful, or anxious as he moves about. For many
years, people believed that it was dangerous to waken a
sleepwalker, but there is no basis for this view. There is,
however, little reason to waken a sleepwalking child, and
610

it may be impossible to do so. Sleepwalking children
should be gently guided back to bed, and will usually be
cooperative in this effort. Episodes of sleepwalking may
be signs of a child’s heightened anxiety about something. Parents should give careful consideration to events
and environmental changes that may have triggered the
onset of sleepwalking. If sleepwalking is common
among family members, it is more likely that the child
may respond to even slight increases in anxiety with
sleepwalking behavior.

Charles Edward Spearman
1863-1945
British theoretical and experimental psychologist
who pioneered studies of intelligence.

Charles Edward Spearman was an influential psychologist who developed commonly used statistical measures
and the statistical method known as factor analysis. His
studies on the nature of human abilities led to his “two-factor” theory of intelligence. Whereas most psychologists
believed that mental abilities were determined by various
independent factors, Spearman concluded that general intelligence, “g,” was a single factor that was correlated with
specific abilities, “s,” to varying degrees. Spearman’s work
became the theoretical justification for intelligence testing.
He also formulated eight basic laws of psychology.
Spearman was born in London in 1863, the second
son of Alexander Young and Louisa Ann Caroline Amelia
(Mainwaring) Spearman. Educated at Leamington College, Spearman joined the army in 1883 and served as a
much-decorated infantry officer in Burma and India.
However his early interest in philosophy led him to his
desire to study psychology and, in 1897, he resigned from
the army as a captain and continued his education.
For the next ten years, Spearman studied experimental psychology in Germany. After earning his Ph.D.
with Wilhelm Wundt at the University of Leipzig in
1906, he worked with Oswald Külpe at the University of
Würzburg and with Georg Elias Müller at the University
of Göttingen. His studies were interrupted for a time by
the Boer War, during which Spearman served as deputyassistant-adjutant-general in Guernsey. Spearman married
Fanny Aikman in 1901. The couple had four daughters,
as well as a son who was killed in the Second World War.

Measures intelligence
In 1904, Spearman published “General Intelligence
Objectively Determined and Measured” in the American

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In 1923 Spearman published The Nature of “Intelligence” and the Principles of Cognition, in which he set
down his principles of psychology. In 1930, in the Creative Mind, he applied his laws of psychology to various
other fields, including aesthetics.
Spearman was the leader of what became the “London school” of psychology that stressed statistical methods and systematic testing of human abilities. Through
Spearman’s influence, University College became the
center of psychological studies in Britain. He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1924 and was president of the British Psychological Society from 1923 until
1926. In 1925 Spearman served as president of the psychology section of the British Association for the Advancement of Science. He became professor of psychology at University College in 1928 and was awarded an
honorary L.L.D. from the University of Wittenberg in
1929. Spearman held honorary memberships in a number of foreign scientific societies.

Writes a history of psychology
Charles Spearman (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

Journal of Psychology. In this work, the first of its kind,
he introduced factor analysis and attempted to determine
the factors that were measured by intelligence tests.
Using statistical methods, Spearman found that the general intelligence factor “g” was associated with mental
processes that were distinct from memory, physical abilities, and the senses. He demonstrated that intelligence
tests, in addition to measuring “g,” also measured specific abilities that he called “s” factors, such as verbal,
mathematical, and artistic skills. This became Spearman’s “two-factor” theory of intelligence.
Returning to England in 1907, Spearman joined
University College, London, as a reader in experimental
psychology. In 1911 he became Grote Professor of Mind
and Logic. During the First World War, Spearman returned to the army and then, as a civilian, carried out
psychological research for the military. Spearman’s work
on intelligence resulted in A Measure of “Intelligence”
for Use in Schools (1925) and The Abilities of Man, their
Nature and Measurement (1927). Spearman’s “two-factor” theory was never widely accepted, and by the 1930s
it was being replaced by multi-factor theories of intelligence. Nevertheless, his work laid the foundation for statistical “factor analysis” in psychology.

Following his retirement as an emeritus professor in
1931, Spearman traveled extensively and taught in the
United States, India, and Egypt. His historical survey,
Psychology Down the Ages was published in 1937. During the Second World War, he served as honorary advisor
on psychology to the school district of Chesterfield.
Spearman died in London in 1945. His final work on intelligence, Human Ability, written with L. Wynn Jones,
was published posthumously in 1950.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Hearnshaw, Leslie. “Spearman, Charles E(dward).” In Thinkers
of the twentieth century: a biographical, bibliographical
and critical dictionary, edited by Elizabeth Devine,
Michael Held, James Vinson, and George Walsh. Detroit:
Gale Research, 1983.
Spearman, C. “C. Spearman.” In A history of psychology in autobiography, edited by Carl Allanmore Murchison. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1967.

Special education
Educational instruction or social services designed
or modified to assist individuals with disabilities.

Special education refers to a range of services, including social work services and rehabilitative counsel-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

611

Special education

Publishes laws of psychology

Special education

ing, provided to individuals with disabilities from ages
3-21 through the public school system, including instruction given in the classroom, at home, or in institutions.
Special education classes are taught by teachers with
professional certification. Some teachers specialize in
working with children with learning disabilities or multiple handicaps, and instruction may take place within a
regular school or a residential school for students with
disabilities.
In 1975, the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (EHCA, PL 94-142) mandated that states provide a “free and appropriate public education” (FAPE) to
all students, including those with physical, mental, or behavioral disabilities. This special education must include
a comprehensive screening and diagnosis by a multi-disciplinary team and the development of an annual Individualized Education Plan (IEP) for each student, outlining academic and behavioral goals, services to be provided, and methods of evaluation. The student’s parents
must consent to initial screening and must be invited to
participate in all phases of the process. Besides the unprecedented move in guaranteeing free comprehensive
services to children with special needs, the act was revolutionary in that it specified that special education take
place in the “least restrictive environment” (LRE). In
1991 the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(IDEA) provided federal assistance to state and local
agencies to implement EHCA and made some revisions
including: requiring that the disability status of the special-needs student be reevaluated every three years;
adding the category of learning disabled as a qualifying
disability; and further interpreting the LRE clause to require that the special-needs student be educated “to the
maximum extent appropriate” with children who are not
disabled. Services are available to individuals ages 2-21,
and states are required to seek and initiate contact with
qualifying individuals.
During the nearly 20 years after the passage of special education laws (1977-94), the rate of enrollment in
public special education programs increased by 46%,
while total enrollment in public schools declined 2%. In
1994, 12% of students enrolled in public schools or institutions were in special education programs. Much of the
increase took place after 1991, when children identified
with learning disabilities dominated special education
classrooms: in 1994 learning disabled students made up
5% of total enrollment, falling short of just half of all special education students. Children’s disabilities are defined
under 13 categories: autism, blindness, visual impairment, deafness, hearing impairment, deaf-blindness, orthopedic (movement) impairments, multiple handicaps
(several disabilities), mental retardation (also called developmental disability), serious emotional disturbance,
612

speech and language disorders, specific learning disabilities (e.g., dyslexia ), and specialized health care needs
(e.g., oxygen dependence). Traumatic brain injury also
qualifies. Of students enrolled in special education programs in 1994, 45% were learning disabled; 19% had
speech and language disorders; 10% were mentally retarded; 8% were deaf or hearing impaired; 8% were seriously
emotionally disturbed; and 8% had other disabilities

Screening and evaluation
To qualify for special education, a child must be diagnosed as having a disability and the disability must be
found to “adversely affect educational performance” so
as to require special services. There is wide variability in
the way students are referred and evaluated for special
education. For children with severe disabilities, the
physician and parents identify and refer the child to special education. Other disabilities or deficits in the child’s
developing physical and cognitive abilities may be identified by teacher and parent observation or revealed by
academic or developmental tests. Most districts have
standardized programs to screen large numbers of children between kindergarten and third grade. Other disabilities may be subtle or compensated for, such as
dyslexia, and may not be discovered until demands on
the student increase in college. After referral, a meeting
is held to determine whether the child should be “assessed” or “evaluated” to determine the type of disability
he or she may have. Tests will attempt to identify the
cognitive (academic), social, or physical tasks which the
child has difficulty performing, and why the difficulty
exists, i.e., what disability or disabilities are present.
Tests may include: reading, writing, spelling, and math
tests; psychological or intelligence tests; speech and language tests; vision and hearing tests; or an examination
by a doctor. Parents must consent to all testing, evaluation, and placement, and can appeal most decisions if
they disagree with the conclusions.

Over- and under-referral
There is some concern about over- or under-referral
in particular disability categories. Mild disabilities are
especially difficult to diagnose. Since special education
laws went into effect, the enrollment of students diagnosed with mental retardation and speech and language
disorders decreased sharply, while those with learning
disabilities increased. The changes reflect a social consciousness about the stigma of labeling and fundamental
changes in the way people view disabilities. Yet, underreferral of mental retardation in particular may reflect
schools’ realistic fear of litigation. Others are concerned
about over referral for mild disabilities (learning and be-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Race
There is a concern that minority students are disproportionately represented in special education, mostly with
learning disabilities. In 1993, white, learning-disabled
students made up 5% of total enrollment in special education. The corresponding percentage of black students
(proportionate to their representation in the total population) would be 0.5%, but African American students with
learning disabilities make up 6% of total enrollment.
There is no consensus on the exact diagnosis of specific
learning disabilities, and the same treatment goals and
teaching strategies are used for all types of learning disabilities. Often psychologists will continue testing until
they “find” a learning disability for which a student can
receive special instruction. Criticism can be levied from
both sides against this practice: white, low-achieving students do not receive special attention they need, and
black students are segregated and labeled incorrectly.

Location of services, mainstreaming, and
inclusion
Before passage of the EHCA and IDEA, many disabled children were either not provided public education
services at all, were in residential settings, or at best in separate day schools. In addition to providing special education in regular public school buildings, the stipulation that
special-needs children be educated in the “least restrictive
environment” led to the practice of mainstreaming. Mainstreaming is the policy of placing special education students in regular classrooms as much as possible, and using
resource rooms where the student receives special tutoring,
review, and instruction. In 1993, 40% of children received
instruction primarily in regular classrooms, 30% in resource rooms, 24% in separate, special education classrooms, and the remaining 6% in public or private day
schools and residential facilities. Students with speech or
language impairments (80%) were most likely to be in
general education classrooms. Mentally retarded and multiple-handicapped students (7% of each group) were the
least likely to be in general education classrooms.
The type of contact special education teachers have
with students varies according to district resources and
student population. Some teachers, such as visual impair-

ment specialists, may serve a whole region, tutoring a specific student only once a week. Others teach entire special
education classes, providing general education teachers
with support, ideas, and resources for mainstreamed
pupils. Inclusion, sometimes considered the logical goal
of mainstreaming, is total integration of special education
students and services into the general education classroom, where special education teachers collaborate with
general education teachers to teach the entire class. Full
inclusion of all special education students would require
restructuring of several traditional educational policies. To
the extent that it necessitates extensive continuing collaboration between special education teachers, general education teachers, and support paraprofessionals, and requires
restructuring of curricula and lessons, full inclusion represents a revolution in educational methods. Research on existing programs suggests that for inclusion to be successful certain attitudes and beliefs must be held and certain
resources must be available:
• The general education teacher must believe the specialneeds student can succeed
• The school must be committed to accepting responsibility for the learning outcomes of special education
students
• Parents must be informed and supportive
• Services and physical accommodations must be adequate for the student’s needs
• The principal must understand the needs of special education students
• Enough teacher and staff hours must be devoted to the
child’s care
• Continuing staff development and technical assistance
must be provided
• Evaluation procedures must be clear
• Special education teachers must be part of the entire
planning process
• A team approach is used by teachers and other specialists
• A variety of instructional arrangements must be available (team teaching, ability grouping, peer tutoring)

Matriculation and employment
In 1992, 44% of special education students graduated with a diploma, 13% graduated with a certificate (including GED finished by age 21), 22% dropped out, and
21% exited school for other reasons. The highest dropout
category was seriously emotionally disturbed students at
35%. The lowest was deaf-blind students, only 4% of
whom dropped out. Graduation and employment rates for
students with disabilities rose over the two decades after
the passage of EHCA and IDEA and other disability leg-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

613

Special education

havioral disorders) as a method of classroom management. Thirty-four states require some method of pre-referral intervention. If a teacher suspects a disability, he
or she must consult with a team of teachers and develop
alternate methods of effectively addressing the student’s
problems, through modifications in instruction or classroom environment, before the school will consider special education referral.

Special education

islation such as the Americans with Disabilities Act. Yet
depending on the disability, as many as 45-70% of disabled adults were still unemployed in the early 1990s.
People with learning disabilities and speech disorders
have the lowest rates of unemployment. Because 77% of
students take vocational education classes, a comprehensive vocational assessment, including assessment of independent living skills, is necessary. The assessment may
take place at a regional center and follow an adult rehabilitation model. Assessments should take place several
times in the course of a student’s school career.

Gifted and talented
Gifted and talented children are those who demonstrate special abilities, aptitude, or creativity. Often they
will express themselves primarily in one area such as humanities, sciences, mathematics, art, music, or leadership. Gifted and talented students are not usually considered clients of special education. There is no federal
mandate or regular funding to support gifted and talented
students, although about half of the states have programs
for the gifted and talented. As a percentage of total public school enrollment, students in gifted and talented programs range from 1-2% in Idaho, Nevada, Alabama, and
Washington to over 10% in Hawaii, Maryland, Michigan, Nebraska, Ohio, Wisconsin, and South Carolina.
In addition to special counseling, grade skipping,
taking summer or correspondence courses, or early graduation, there are a variety of adaptations that can be
made to serve the needs of gifted students. Adaptations
can be made to the content, the process, or the products
of learning. Some strategies include:
Acceleration—Raising the academic level of assignments and giving the student reading material at a higher
level of difficulty.
Telescoping—Reducing the time allowed the student
to cover given content. For example, a teacher could give
the student two successive mathematics chapters to complete in the ordinary time period used to cover one chapter.
Compacting—Testing to determine how much of a
certain content unit the student knows already and custom designing a curriculum to fill in the gaps. Students
can then use the gained time for creative or exploratory
activities.
Independent study—Allowing the student to choose
his or her own focus, plan research, present material, and
evaluate the process.
Tiered assignments—Preparing assignments at different levels for different students. Asking more complex
and higher order questions in assignments for gifted and
talented students.
614

Other tools for pacing the learning of gifted and talented students are portfolios and learning centers. Several commercially prepared curricula that provide structured exploratory and design projects are also available.
Further Reading
Adelman, H., and L. Taylor. Learning Problems and Learning
Disabilities. Pacific, CA: Brooks, 1993.
Algozzine, B. et al. Behaviorally Disordered? Assessment for
Identification and Instruction. Reston, VA: The Council
for Exceptional Children, 1991.
Council of Administrators of Special Education. Student Access: A Resource Guide for Educators, Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Albuquerque, NM: Author,
1991.
Cummins, J. Bilingualism and Special Education: Issues in Assessment and Pedagogy. Clevedon, England: Multilingual
Matters. Co-published in the U.S. by College-Hill Press,
San Diego, 1994.
Cook, L., and M. Friend. Interactions: Collaboration Skills for
School Professionals. White Plains, NY: Longman Publishing, 1992.
Council for Exceptional Children, Department of Public Policy. The Rights of Children with Disabilities under ADA
and Section 504: A Comparison to IDEA. Reston, VA:
Author, 1994.
Giangreco, M. F., et al. Choosing Options and Accommodations for Children: A Guide to Planning Inclusive Education. Baltimore: Paul H. Brookes, 1993.
Gutkin, T. B., and C. R. Reynolds, eds. The Handbook of
School Psychology. 2nd ed. New York: Wiley, 1990.
Hallahan, D., and J. Kaufmann. Exceptional Children. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1991.
Hunt, N., and K. Marshall. Exceptional Children and Youth.
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1994.
Levinson, E. M. Transdisciplinary Vocational Assessment: Issues in School-Based Programs. Brandon, VT: Clinical
Psychology Publishing Co., 1993.
Marder, C., and R. D’Amico. How Well Are Youth with Disabilities Really Doing? A Comparison of Youth with Disabilities and Youth in General. Menlo Park, CA: SRI International, 1992.
National Center for Education Statistics. Products Avaialbe
from the National Center for Education Statistics. Washington, DC: NCES, 1997.
Stoner, G., et al. Interventions for Achievement and Behavior
Problems. Silver Spring, MD: National Association of
School Psychologists, 1991.
U.S. Department of Education. Eighteenth Annual Report to
Congress on the Implementation of the Individuals with
Disabilities Act. Washington, DC: Office of Special Education Programs, 1996.
Wang, M. C., et al. The Handbook of Special Education: Research and Practice. Vols 1 & 2. Oxford, England: Pergamon Press, 1987.

Further Information
American Coalition of Citizens with Disabilities. 1012 Fourteenth Street, NW, Washington, DC 20005.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Specific language impairment
(SLI)
Describes a condition of markedly delayed language development in the absence of any apparent
handicapping conditions.

Many different terms have been used to describe the
disorder of childhood characterized by markedly delayed language development in the absence of any apparent handicapping conditions such as deafness,
autism, or mental retardation. It is sometimes called
childhood dysphasia, or developmental language disorder. Much research since the 1960s has attempted to
identify clinical subtypes of the disorder. These include
verbal auditory agnosia and specific language impairment. Some children have a very precise difficulty in
processing speech, called verbal auditory agnosia, that
may be due to an underlying pathology in the temporal
lobes of the brain. The most prevalent sub-type of childhood language disorder, phonosyntactic disorder, is now
commonly termed specific language impairment or SLI.
These children have a disorder specifically affecting inflectional morphology and syntax.
Very little is known about the cause or origin (referred to as etiology) of specific language impairment,
though evidence is growing that the underlying condition
may be a form of brain abnormality, not obvious with existing diagnostic technologies: SLI children do not have
clear brain lesions or marked anatomical differences in
either brain hemisphere. However, there is some indication of a familial pattern in SLI, with clinicians noting
patterns across generations. It is more common in boys
than girls. As of the 1990s, research suggests a possible
genetic link, though there are still many problems in identifying such a gene. Sometimes the siblings of an affected
child show milder forms of the difficulty, complicating
the picture. One of the major stumbling blocks is the definition of the disorder, because the population of children

with language impairments is still much more heterogeneous than required to support a search for a gene.
Children with SLI usually begin to talk at roughly
the same age as normal children but are markedly slower in the progress they make. They seem to have particular problems with inflection and word forms (inflectional
morphology), such as leaving off endings as in the past
tense verb form. This problem persists much longer than
early childhood, often into the grade school years and
beyond, where the children encounter renewed difficulties in reading and writing. The SLI child has also been
observed to have difficulties learning language “incidentally,” that is, in picking up a new word from context, or
generalizing a new syntactic form. This is in decided
contrast to the normal child’s case, where incidental
learning and generalization are the hallmarks of language acquisition. Children with SLI are not necessarily
cognitively impaired, and are not withdrawn or socially
aloof like the autistic child.
Some investigators have attributed the SLI child’s
difficulty to speech sounds (a phonological problem),
suggesting that inflection and word forms (morphology)
such as endings are vulnerable because those items are
so fleeting and unstressed in speech. It is not that the
child is deaf in general, but that he has a specific difficulty discriminating speech sounds.
Other researchers have argued that this difficulty is
not specific to speech but reflects a general perceptual
difficulty with the processing of rapidly timed events, of
which speech is the most taxing example. The left hemisphere of the brain seems to be specialized for processing rapid acoustic events, so perhaps the SLI child has a
unique difficulty with that part of the brain. Yet phonology does not seem to be the whole problem because the
child may be quite good at articulation or speech perception per se. Instead, it is argued that the child may
have a linguistic difficulty with morphology, going beyond the sounds themselves. Cross-linguistic work supports a more refined perspective that suggests certain
kinds of inflectional morphology, especially those associated with the verb, may be more likely to be disrupted
than others. If so, that would suggest the problem is not
just phonological and not just inflectional. Given the
centrality of the verb to sentence structure, the difficulty
causes pervasive problems.
Whatever the final identification of the linguistic
problem, researchers are curious to discover how such a
specific disorder could come about: is a language “module” of the brain somehow compromised in these children? The puzzle is that children with very precise lesions of the usual language areas somehow overcome

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

615

Specific language impairment (SLI)

Association for Children and Adults with Learning Disabilities. 4156 Library Road, Pittsburgh, PA 15234.
National Information Center for Handicapped Children and
Youth. 155 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 508, Arlington, VA
22209.
National Center for Education Statistics. 555 New Jersey Ave.,
NW, Washington, DC 20208-5574. nces.gov.
The Council for Exceptional Children. 1920 Association Drive,
Reston, VA 22091, (703) 620–3660.
Learning Disabilities Association of America. 4156 Library
Road, Pittsburgh, PA 15234, (412) 341–1515.

Speech-language pathology

those difficulties more easily than the SLI child who presents no such dramatic brain abnormalities.
The child with SLI becomes increasingly aware of
his difficulties with language and may lose spontaneity
and avoid conversation as he gets older. Intensive language intervention can allow these children to make considerable gains, with modeling of appropriate linguistic
forms producing more gains than simply “enriching” the
child’s language environment. Early identification is
thus seen as very important for intervention. One procedure for children aged 24 to 36 months asks parents to
complete a standardized questionnaire in which they
check off the vocabulary the child knows, and write down
examples of the child’s two-word sentences. If the child
has fewer than 50 words and no two-word sentences, that
is an indication of risk for language disorder. Estimates of
true SLI vary according to the age of identification: some
experts argue that as many as 10% of 2-year-olds may
have a specific language impairment, but by age 3 or 4,
that percentage drops considerably, presumably because
some difficulties resolve themselves. The incidence in the
general population is estimated at about 1%.
Jill De Villiers, Ph.D.
Further Reading
Gleason, Jean Berko. The Development of Language. (4th ed.)
Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1996.
Peterson, Harold A. Appraisal and Diagnosis of Speech and
Language Disorders. (3rd ed.) Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1994.
Taylor, Orlando L. Nature of Communication Disorders in
Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Populations. San
Diego: College-Hill Press, 1986.

Speech-language pathology
Treatment for the improvement or cure of communication disorders, including both speech problems
and language disorders.

Formerly referred to as speech therapy, the techniques, strategies, and interventions designed to improve
or correct communication disorders are known as speechlanguage pathology. Both speech disorders, which involve difficulty in producing the sounds of language, and
language disorders, which involve difficulty in understanding language or using words in spoken communication, are treated by speech-language pathologists.
In 1993, there were nearly 70,000 speech-language
pathologists in the United States certified by the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA).
616

Speech disorders treated by speech-language pathologists include voice disorders (abnormalities in pitch, volume, vocal quality, or resonance or duration of sounds),
articulation disorders (problems producing speech
sounds), and fluency disorders (impairment in the normal rate or rhythm of speech, such as stuttering).
Speech-language pathologists participate in the screening, assessment, and treatment of patients.
Persons with isolated speech disorders are often
helped by articulation therapy, in which they practice
repeating specific sounds, words, phrases, and sentences. For stuttering and other fluency disorders, a
popular treatment method is fluency training, which develops coordination between speech and breathing,
slows down the rate of speech, and develops the ability
to prolong syllables. A person may practice saying a
single word fluently and then gradually add more
words, slowly increasing the amount and difficulty of
speech that can be mastered without stuttering. The
speaking situations can gradually be made more challenging as well, starting with speaking alone to the
pathologist and ending with speaking to a group of people. Delayed auditory feedback (DAF), in which stutterers hear an echo of their own speech sounds, has also
been effective in treating stuttering. When a speech
problem is caused by serious or multiple disabilities, a
neurodevelopmental approach, which inhibits certain
reflexes to promote normal movement, is often preferred. Other techniques used in speech therapy include
the motor-kinesthetic approach and biofeedback,
which helps people know whether the sounds they are
producing are faulty or correct. For people with severe
communication disorders, speech pathologists can assist with alternate means of communication, such as
manual signing and computer-synthesized speech.
The majority of speech-language pathologists work
in educational institutions, many of them in public elementary schools. They are also found at both residential
health care facilities and over 300 outpatient clinics that
specialize in communication disorders and are often affiliated with hospitals and universities. Professional
training programs in speech-language pathology are offered at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Undergraduate training may include classes in biology,
anatomy, psychology, linguistics, education, and special
education. Most clinicians hold a master’s degree in
communications sciences and disorders from a program
accredited by the ASHA.
Further Reading
Flower, R.M. Delivery of Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology Services. Baltimore, MD: Williams and Wilkins,
1986.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Speech perception

A school-age girl is repeating phrases in speech therapy. ( Photo Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

Hicks, Patricia Larkins. Opportunities in Speech-Language
Pathology Careers. Lincolnwood, IL: VGM Career Horizons, 1996.
Lass, N.J., L.V. McReynolds, and J.L. Northern. Handbook on
Speech-Language Pathology and Audiology. Philadelphia:
B.C. Decker, 1988.

Further Information
American Academy of Private Practice in Speech-Language
Pathology and Audiology. 7349 Topanga Canyon Boulevard, Canoga Park, CA 91303.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association. 10801
Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20785, (301) 897–5700.
National Black Association for Speech, Language and Hearing. 3542 Gentry Ridge Court, Silver Spring, MD 20904.

Speech perception
The ability to hear and understand speech.

Speech perception, the process by which we employ
cognitive, motor, and sensory processes to hear and understand speech, is a product of innate preparation (“na-

ture”) and sensitivity to experience (“nurture”) as
demonstrated in infants’ abilities to perceive speech.
Studies of infants from birth have shown that they respond to speech signals in a special way, suggesting a
strong innate component to language. Other research has
shown the strong effect of environment on language acquisition by proving that the language an infant listens to
during the first year of life enables the child to begin producing a distinct set of sounds (babbling) specific to the
language spoken by its parents.
Since the 1950s, great strides have been made in research on the acoustics of speech (i.e., how sound is produced by the human vocal tract). It has been demonstrated how certain physiologic gestures used during speech
produce specific sounds and which speech features are
sufficient for the listener to determine the phonetic identity of these sound units. Speech prosody (the pitch,
rhythm, tempo, stress, and intonation of speech) also
plays a critical role in infants’ ability to perceive language. Two other distinct aspects of perception—segmentation (the ability to break the spoken language signal into the parts that make up words) and normalization
(the ability to perceive words spoken by different speak-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

617

Speech perception

ers, at different rates, and in different phonetic contexts
as the same)—are also essential components of speech
perception demonstrated at an early age by infants.
In addition to the acoustic analysis of the incoming
messages of spoken language, two other sources of information are used to understand speech: “bottom-up”
and “top-down”. In the former, we receive auditory information, convert it into a neural signal and process
the phonetic feature information. In the latter, we use
stored information about language and the world to
make sense of the speech. Perception occurs when both
sources of information interact to make only one alternative plausible to the listener who then perceives a
specific message.
To understand how bottom-up processing works in
the absence of a knowledge base providing top-down information, researchers have studied infant speech perception using two techniques: high-amplitude sucking
(HAS) and head-turn (HT). In HAS, infants from 1 to 4
months of age suck on a pacifier connected with a pressure transducer which measures the pressure changes
caused by sucking responses when a speech sound is
presented. Head turn conditioning is used to test infants
between 6 months and one year of age. With this technique, a child is trained to turn his or her head when a
speech sound, repeated once every second as a background stimulus, is changed to a comparison speech
sound. When the head is turned during the presentation
of the comparison stimulus, the child is rewarded with a
visual stimulus of a toy which makes a sound.
As a result of studies using these techniques, it has
been shown that infants at the earliest ages have the ability to discriminate phonetic contrasts (/bat/ and /pat/) and
prosodic changes such as intonation contours in speech.
However, to understand speech, more than the ability to
discriminate between sounds is needed; speech must be
perceptually organized into phonetic categories, ignoring
some differences and listening to others.
To measure categorical perception, adults were
asked to discriminate between a series of sounds varying
in equal steps in acoustic dimension from /ra/ to /la/. As
predicted by the categorical perception phenomenon,
their discrimination improved at the boundary between
the two phonetic categories. However, adult listeners
could do this only for sounds in their native language.
The discovery that categorical perception was languagespecific suggested that it might be a learned behavior.
This prompted researchers to question if categorical perception was the result of experience with language. If so,
young infants could not be expected to show it, while
older infants, who had experienced language, might be
expected to do so.
618

Using the sucking technique, this study revealed that
at birth, infants’ discrimination of /pa/ and /ba/ was categorical not only with the perception of sounds in their native language but also with sounds from foreign languages
as if the infants heard all the phonetic distinctions used in
all languages. But if this “language-general” speech perception ability of infants later became “language-specific”
speech perception in adults, when and by what process did
this change occur? To answer this question, researchers
began to study the perception of phonetic prototypes (i.e.,
the “best” members of a phonetic category).
Under the assumption that sound prototypes exist in
speech categories, adults were asked to judge the category “goodness” of a sampling of one hundred instances of
the vowel /i/ using a scale from 1 to 7. Results indicated
evidence of a vowel prototype for /i/, but also showed
that phonetic prototypes or “best” vowels differed for
speakers of different languages. Further perceptual testing revealed an even more unique occurrence: sounds
that were close to a prototype could not be distinguished
from the prototype, even though they were physically
different. It appeared as if the prototype perceptually assimilated nearby sounds like a magnet, attracting the
other sounds in that category. Dubbed the perceptual
magnet effect, this theory offered a possible explanation
of why adult speakers of a given language can no longer
hear certain phonetic distinctions as is the case with
Japanese speakers who have difficulty discriminating between /r/ and /l/; the Japanese prototype is something
that is acoustically similar to both sounds and results in
their assimilation by the Japanese prototype.
To discover whether infants are born with all the
prototypes of all languages and whether language experience then eliminates those prototypes which are not reinforced, an experiment in which 6-month-old American
infants listened to English was performed (Kuhl, 1991).
It confirmed the perceptual magnet effect but left the
question of the role of language experience unresolved.
When a study was conducted (Kuhl, Williams, Lacerda,
Stevens & Lindblom, 1992) with listeners from two different languages (English and Swedish) on the same
vowel prototypes it was demonstrated that the perceptual
magnet effect is strongly affected by exposure to a specific language.
The Native Language Magnet (NLM) theory grew
out of the research on the development of speech perception. Simply stated, it explains how infants at birth can
hear all of the phonetic distinctions used in the world’s
languages. However, during the first year of life, prior to
the acquisition of word meaning and contrastive phonology, infants begin to perceive speech by forming mental
representations or perceptual maps of the speech they
hear in their environment. These representations, stored

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Patricia Kuhl, Ph.D.

vidual who has served as president of both the American
Psychological Association and the American Psychological Society, Spence has been the recipient of numerous
awards. She was elected to the American Academy of
Arts and Sciences and holds honorary degrees from
Oberlin College and Ohio State University.
Born in Toledo, Ohio, in 1923, young Janet was the
elder of two daughters of John C. and Helen Hodge Taylor. Both her mother and grandmother were graduates of
Vassar College. Helen Taylor also held a master’s degree
in economics from Columbia. She worked for the
League of Women Voters, managed Republican election
campaigns, and eventually became director of a social
service agency. John Taylor was the business manager of
a labor union and an active Socialist. After two years at a
girls’ high school in Northfield, Massachusetts, Spence
enrolled at Oberlin College, a liberal arts school in Ohio.
Following graduation in 1945, she entered the graduate
clinical psychology program at Yale University.

Further Reading
Aitchison, Jean. The Seeds of Speech: Language Origin and
Evolution. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Kuhl, Patricia K, Ph.D. “Speech Perception.” Introduction to
Communication Sciences and Disorders. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group, Inc.
———. Learning and Representation in Speech and Language. Philadelphia: Current Biology Ltd.

Speech
See Language development

Janet Taylor Spence
1923American clinical, experimental, and social psychologist, known for her studies on motivation and
on gender identity.

Janet Taylor Spence has made important contributions to several branches of psychology. Her early work,
the Taylor Manifest Anxiety Scale (MAS), became a
standard method for relating anxiety to performance. She
discovered the importance of intrinsic motivation in performance, at a time when most psychologists believed in
reward models of learning and performance. Later,
Spence turned her attention to gender studies and developed a general theory of gender identity. The only indi-

Measures anxiety and motivation
After a year of working with intelligence tests at Yale
with Catherine Cox Miles, Janet Taylor took a rotating internship in New York State. Deciding against pursuing
clinical psychology, she moved to the University of Iowa
to work with Kenneth Spence, co-author of the HullSpence theory of behavior. For her dissertation, Taylor developed the MAS, which measured individual motivational levels and was used to select subjects for experimental
studies. In further research, she studied the relationship
between anxiety levels and performance. The MAS is still
used in psychology to measure anxiety levels.
After receiving her Ph.D. in 1949, Taylor joined the
psychology department of Northwestern University in
Evanston, Illinois, as the first woman faculty member.
Two years later, she was promoted from instructor to assistant professor and she became an associate professor
in 1956. Despite a demanding teaching load, that required her to develop seven different courses, from introductory and experimental psychology to statistics, during her first year at Northwestern, she continued her productive research program. Taylor published eighteen papers and co-authored a statistics textbook during her ten
years at Northwestern.

Marries Kenneth Spence
Janet Taylor Spence returned to Iowa City with her
new husband in 1959. Since nepotism policies at the university prevented her from working in the same department as her husband, she became a research psychologist at the Veterans Administration Hospital. When Ken-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

619

Janet Taylor Spence

in the brain, constitute the beginnings of language-specific speech perception and serve as a blueprint which
guides infants’ attempts to produce speech. The native
language magnet effect works to partition the infant’s
perceptual space in a way that conforms to phonetic categories in the language that is heard. Sounds in the spoken language that are close to a given magnet or prototype are perceptually pulled into the magnet and thus assimilated, and not discriminated, by the listener. As the
perceptual space surrounding a category prototype or
magnet shrinks, it takes a very large acoustic difference
for the listener to hear that sound. However, a very small
acoustic difference in the region of a nonprototype can
be heard easily. Thus the developing magnet pulls
sounds that were once discriminable toward a single
magnet, making them no longer discriminable and
changing the infant’s perception of speech.

Kenneth W. Spence

neth Spence moved to the psychology department at the
University of Texas at Austin, she found a research associate position at a Texas state school for retarded children. In 1965, she obtained a faculty appointment in the
Department of Educational Psychology at the University of Texas. During this period, Spence studied motivation and reinforcement, first with schizophrenics at the
Veterans Hospital and then applying her experimental
methods to developmental issues in children. She made
the remarkable discovery that rewards were not only ineffective, but were counterproductive, as motivators of
performance. Instead, Spence demonstrated the importance of intrinsic motivation in individual performance.
With her husband’s death in 1967, Spence finally
was able to join the psychology department of the University of Texas. Between 1968 and 1972, she served as
department chair. In addition to her numerous publications, Spence served on the editorial boards of a number
of psychology journals and, from 1973 until 1979, she
edited Contemporary Psychology. She also has worked
with many professional committees, including those of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science. Spence was as a Fellow at the Center for Advanced
Study in the Behavioral Sciences in 1978 and, in 1979,
she became Ashbel Smith Professor of Psychology and
Educational Psychology at the University of Texas.

Undertakes gender research
In the 1970s, Spence began collaborating with
Robert Helmreich. Their “Work and Family Orientation
Questionnaire” examined various factors in achievement
motivation; in particular, perseverance, mastery, and
competitiveness. They also began examining achievement motivation and behavior. At the same time, Spence
and Helmreich began examining gender issues. They developed several indices for measuring gender-related
characteristics and attitudes, including the “Attitudes toward Women Scale” and the “Personal Attributes Questionnaire.” Their 1978 book, Masculinity and Femininity: Their Psychological Dimensions, Correlates and Antecedents, moved the study of gender into the mainstream of psychological research. Spence’s theory of
gender identity was published in 1985.
Spence, who also became the Alma Cowden Madden Professor of Liberal Arts at the University of Texas,
retired in 1997. She lives on Cape Cod in Massachusetts.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Deaux, Kay. “Janet Taylor Spence (1923- ).” In Women in psychology: a bio-bibliographic sourcebook, edited by Agnes
620

N. O’Connell and Nancy Felipe Russo. New York: Greenwood Press, 1990.
Spence, J. T. “Janet Taylor Spence, 1923-.” In Models of
achievement: reflections of eminent women in psychology,
edited by A. N. O’Connell and N. F. Russo. Vol. 2. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1988.
Swann, William B., Judith H. Langlois, and Lucia Albino
Gilbert. Sexism and stereotypes in modern Society: the
gender science of Janet Taylor. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association, 1999.

Kenneth W. Spence
1907-1967
American neobehavioral psychologist known for
both theoretical and experimental research on
learning.

Kenneth Wartinbee Spence was known for his theoretical and experimental studies of conditioning and
learning. His analyses and interpretations of the theories
of other psychologists also were very influential. Spence
was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in
1954 and was a fellow of the American Association for
the Advancement of Science and the American Psychological Association (APA).
The son of Mary E. Wartinbee and William James
Spence, an electrical engineer, Spence was born in
Chicago, Illinois, in 1907, but he grew up in Montreal,
Quebec, Canada. Spence attended West Hill High
School and McGill University in Montreal, earning his
bachelor’s degree in 1929 and his master’s degree the
following year. He won the Wales Gold Medal in Mental Sciences from McGill in 1929 and the university’s
Governor-General’s Medal for Research in 1930. Moving to Yale University, Spence studied with the famous
primate biologist Robert M. Yerkes and with the behavioral psychologist Clark L. Hull. Spence’s early
work was concerned with discrimination learning in
animals. After receiving his Ph.D. in psychology in
1933, Spence was a National Research Council fellow
and research assistant, working with chimpanzees at
the Yale Laboratories of Primate Biology in Orange
Park., Florida.

Elaborates on Hull’s learning theories
In 1937, Spence became an assistant professor of
psychology at the University of Virginia and, a year later,
he moved to the State University of Iowa (now the University of Iowa) in Iowa City, as an associate professor.
Spence was particularly interested in learning and conditioning. He extended the research and theories of Hull, in

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Amsel, A. “Kenneth Wartenbee Spence.” Biographical memoir.
Vol. 66. Washington, DC: National Academy of Sciences,
1995.
Amsel, K. W. S. “Spence, Kenneth Wartenbee.” In Biographical dictionary of psychology, edited by Noel Sheehy,
Antony J. Chapman, and Wendy A. Conroy. London:
Routledge, 1997.
Kendler, Howard H., and Janet T. Spence. Essays in neobehaviorism: a memorial volume to Kenneth W. Spence. New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts,1971.

Split-brain technique
Procedure used to study the activities of the two
hemispheres of the brain separately, and independent of each other.

University of Iowa becomes center of
theoretical psychology
Spence became a full professor and head of the psychology department at Iowa in 1942. Together with
Kurt Lewin at the Child Welfare Research Station, and
the science philosopher Gustav Bergmann, Spence
made the University of Iowa into a major center of theoretical psychology, with the goal of transforming psychology into an advanced natural science. Spence collaborated with Bergmann on logical positivism, the
framework for his theories of psychology. In 1956,
Spence’s Silliman Lectures at Yale University were published as Behavior Theory and Conditioning . In 1960,
many of his papers were collected as Behavior Theory
and Learning. Spence also served on the U. S. Air Force
Committee on Human Resources and the Army Scientific Advisory Panel.
By the late 1940s, Spence and other neobehaviorists
had succeeded in infusing all of American psychology
with behaviorism. Spence pointed out that American
psychologists no longer bothered to identify themselves
as behaviorists; rather, it was taken for granted. With the
rise of cognitive behavioral approaches, Spence’s theories received less attention. However his experimental
methods continued to be regarded highly.
Spence married his former graduate student, Janet
Taylor Spence, in 1959. In 1964, he moved to the psychology department at the University of Texas in
Austin. Over the course of his career, Spence was advisor to some 75 Ph.D. students. His many awards included the Howard Crosby Warren Medal of the Society of Experimental Psychologists in 1953 and the first
Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award of the
APA in 1956. Spence died of cancer in Austin, Texas,
in 1967.
Margaret Alic

Psychologists have demonstrated that even simple
human tasks, like thinking of a word when viewing an
object, involve separate subtasks within the brain. These
smaller tasks involve identifying the object, assessing its
use, remembering what other objects are related to it, determining how many syllables are in the word associated
with the object, and so on.
People do not realize the complexity of seemingly
simple tasks because the brain integrates information
smoothly and flawlessly almost all the time. One structure in the brain involved in the exchange and integration
of information from one part to the next is the corpus
callosum, a bundle of about 200 million nerve fibers that
connect the right and left hemispheres of the brain.
Beginning in the 1940s, neurologists questioned
whether the corpus callosum was involved in the development of epileptic seizures. Evidence from monkeys
suggested that abnormal neural responses in one hemisphere spread to the other via the corpus callosum, resulting in major seizure activity. As such, it might be
beneficial to patients suffering from epilepsy to sever the
corpus callosum in order to prevent the spread of this abnormal neural activity. After some initial problems with
the surgical procedure, neurologists documented the
benefit of such surgery, called cerebral commisurotomy.
This so-called split-brain surgery resulted in an increase
in split-brain research. One of the primary researchers in
this area was neurosurgeon Roger Sperry (1913-1994).
Research neurosurgeons discovered that after
surgery, patients often experienced a short period during
which they could not speak and had difficulty controlling
the left side of their bodies. This set of problems, called
acute disconnection syndrome, probably reflected the
trauma caused by the surgery itself. After the patient re-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

621

Split-brain technique

an attempt to establish a precise, mathematical formulation to describe the acquisition of learned behavior. He
tried to measure simple learned behaviors such as salivating in anticipation of eating. Much of his research focused on classically conditioned, easily measured, eyeblinking behavior in relation to anxiety and other factors.
He measured anxiety using the Taylor Manifest Anxiety
Scale developed by his graduate student, Janet Taylor,
whom he eventually married. Spence believed in “latent
learning,” that reinforcement was not necessary for
learning to occur. However, he thought that reinforcement was a strong motivator for performance. Collectively, this work eventually became known as the HullSpence theory of conditioning and learning.

Benjamin Spock

covered from this trauma, his or her everyday behavior
appeared unchanged. The two hemispheres of the brain
were no longer directly connected, so information from
one half of the brain should not have been able to get to
the other. Researchers required subtle and sophisticated
techniques to be able to differentiate people whose corpus callosum had been cut from those with intact brains.
Such techniques involve using apparatus that can
present visual information so that it goes to only one side
of the brain. In this case, split-brain patients may not be
able to label a picture that stimulates on the right side of
the brain; they may have no difficulty when the left side
of the brain, which normally controls language production, receives stimulation. At the same time, research in
the area has been conflicting. Some work reveals considerable sophistication in language ability in the right
hemisphere. Although language functions do differ
across hemispheres, split-brain research has not completely resolved the issue about the nature and the degree
to which the left and right hemispheres differ.
More recent research has suggested that the left
hemisphere may be involved in much linguistic behavior
because of its strength in dealing with analytical, structured tasks. On the other hand, the right hemisphere may
be better in spatial tasks because these tasks require
holistic, synthetic functioning—the strength of the right
hemisphere.
When the patients were asked to point to pictures of
the normal faces, they selected the normal face associated with the half of the chimeric face that stimulated the
right hemisphere. When forced to respond verbally, the
patients showed a preference for the picture that had
stimulated the left hemisphere. Although researchers
cannot specify the exact differences in the functioning of
the two hemispheres, regular differences along visual
and linguistic lines have emerged.
Although the research has demonstrated differences
in the functioning of the two hemispheres of the brain,
everyday behavior may appear completely normal in
split-brain patients. This is true because human behavior
is very flexible and adaptable. For example, a split-brain
patient might turn the head when focusing on an object;
thereby stimulating both hemispheres. Further, these patients use cross-cuing in which they invoke as many different modalities, like vision, audition, and touch, to
help them make sense of their world.
See also Left-Brain Hemisphere; Psychosurgery;
Right-Brain Hemisphere.
Further Reading
Springer, S. P., and G. Deutsch. Left Brain, Right Brain. 2d ed.
New York: W. H. Freeman, 1985.
622

Benjamin Spock
1903-1998
Pediatrician most noted for his authorship of Baby
and Child Care, which significantly changed predominant attitudes toward the raising of infants and
children.

Benjamin McLane Spock was born on May 2,
1903, in New Haven, Connecticut, the oldest child in a
large, strict New England family. His family was so
strict that in his 82nd year he would still be saying “I
love to dance in order to liberate myself from my puritanical upbringing.” Educated at private preparatory
schools, he attended Yale from 1921 to 1925, majoring
in English literature. He was a member of the racing
crew that represented the United States in the 1924
Olympic Games at Paris, finishing 300 feet ahead of its
nearest rival. He began medical school at Yale in 1925,
and transferred to Columbia University’s College of
Physicians and Surgeons in 1927. He had, by this time,
married Jane Davenport Cheney, whom he had met after
a Yale-Harvard boat race.
Spock had decided well before starting his medical
studies that he would “work with children, who have
their whole lives ahead of them” and so, upon taking his
M.D. degree in 1929 and serving his general internship
at the prestigious Presbyterian Hospital, he specialized in
pediatrics at a small hospital crowded with children in
New York’s Hell’s Kitchen area. Believing that pediatricians at that time were focusing too much on the physical side of child development, he took up a residency in
psychiatry as well.
Between 1933 and 1944, Spock practiced pediatric
medicine, while at the same time teaching pediatrics at
Cornell Medical College and consulting in pediatric psychiatry for the New York City Health Department. On a
summer vacation in 1943, he began to write his most famous book, Baby and Child Care, and he continued to
work on it from 1944 to 1946 while serving as a medical
officer in the Navy.
The book sharply broke with the authoritarian tone
and rigorous instructions found in earlier generations of
baby-care books, most of which said to feed infants on a
strict schedule and not to pick them up when they cried.
Spock, who spent ten years trying to reconcile his psychoanalytic training with what mothers were telling him
about their children, told his readers “You know more
than you think you do…. Don’t be afraid to trust your
own common sense…. Take it easy, trust your own instincts, and follow the directions that your doctor gives
you.” The response was overwhelming. Baby and Child
Care rapidly became America’s all-time best-seller ex-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Benjamin Spock

cept for Shakespeare and the Bible; by 1976, it had also
eclipsed Shakespeare.
After his discharge from the Navy, Spock became
associated with the famous Mayo Clinic (1947-1951)
and then became a professor of child development at the
University of Pittsburgh (1951-1955) and at Case Western Reserve (1955-1967). His political activism began
during this period, growing logically out of his concern
for children. A healthy environment for growing children, he believed, included a radiation-free atmosphere
to breathe and so, in 1962, he became co-chairman of
SANE, an organization dedicated to stopping nuclear
bomb tests in the Earth’s atmosphere. The following
year, in which the United States did ratify a nuclear test
ban treaty, he campaigned for Medicare, incurring the
wrath of the American Medical Association, many of
whose members were already suspicious of a colleague
who wrote advice columns for the Ladies Home Journal
and Redbook instead of writing technical monographs
for the medical journals.
Spock was an early opponent of the Indo-China war;
his view on that subject, Dr. Spock on Vietnam, appeared
in 1968. As the war escalated, so did antiwar protest, in
which Spock participated vigorously, marching and
demonstrating with militant youths who had not yet been
born when he began his medical career. Conservatives
accused him of having created, in large measure, the
youth protest movement of the 1960s. Ignoring his many
admonitions to parents in Baby and Child Care that they
should “set limits,” his political opponents accused
Spock of teaching “permissiveness,” by which they
claimed an entire generation of American youth had
been raised and ruined. In vain, Spock pointed out that
similar student protests were happening in Third World
countries where his book enjoyed no circulation and
were not happening in Western Europe countries where
it sold well.
Because of his own strict personal upbringing and
his acute moral sense, Spock may have intended a lot
less when he told parents to “relax” than some of them
realized. In 1968, he revised Baby and Child Care to
make his intentions more clear, now cautioning his readers “Don’t be afraid that your children will dislike you”
if you set those limits and enforce them. Nevertheless,
that 1968 edition showed a 50 percent drop in sales,
mainly, Spock thought, because of his stand on Vietnam.
On May 20, 1968, along with several other leading
war protesters, Spock was put on trial for conspiracy.
The charge was that he had counseled young people to
resist the draft. In the superheated political atmosphere
of the times, he was convicted, but on appeal the verdict
was set aside on a technicality. Some indignant readers

Benjamin Spock (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

returned their well-thumbed copies of Baby and Child
Care in order to prevent further undermining of their
children’s patriotism. To many other readers, however,
the government’s indictment of the baby doctor seemed
rather like prosecuting Santa Claus.
Two books published in 1970, Decent and Indecent:
Our Personal and Political Behavior and A Teenager’s
Guide to Life and Love, made it clear that Spock was a
good deal more of a traditional moralist than either his
friends or his enemies were aware. He had been driven
into the antiwar and other reform movements by the
same imperious, old-fashioned conscience that propelled
some of his opponents in exactly the opposite direction.
At the same time, the doctor showed himself capable of growing and changing. His social activism mutated into socialism, and in 1972 he ran for president on the
People’s Party ticket. He was also capable of admitting a
mistake. Badgered for some five years on the lecture
platform by feminist objectors to the gender-role stereotypes of fathers and mothers as they appeared in Baby
and Child Care, he eventually conceded that much of
what they had said had been right. In 1976, 30 years
after its initial publication, Spock brought out a third
version of the famous book, deleting material he himself

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

623

Sports psychology

termed “sexist” and calling for greater sharing by fathers
in the parental role. He also yielded 45 percent of subsequent book royalties in the divorce settlement that year
with his wife, who contended she had done much more
of the work on Baby and Child Care than he had ever acknowledged. Spock was remarried in the fall of 1976 to
Mary Morgan Councille.
Formally retired in 1967, Spock was the kind of person who in spirit never really retires. Contemplating his
own death as his health began to fail in the 1980s, he
wrote in 1985 (at the age of 82) that he did not want any
lugubrious funeral tunes played over him: “My ideal
would be the New Orleans black funeral, in which
friends snake-dance through the streets to the music of a
jazz band.” He had chronic bronchitis and suffered a
stroke in 1989. His wife, Mary, collaborated with Spock
on his autobiography, Spock on Spock, which was published in 1989. His book A Better World for Our Children was published in 1994 and explored the relationship
between child-rearing and politics. According to an article in the Detroit Free Press, Spock said “When I look at
our society and think of the millions of children exposed
every day to its harmful effects, I am near despair.” Dr.
Spock died at his home in La Jolla, California on March
15, 1998 at the age of 94.
See also Child development; Child psychology
Further Reading
Bloom, Lynn Z. Doctor Spock: biography of a conservative
radical. 1972.
Maier, Thomas. Dr. Spock: an American life. 1998.
Mitford, Jessica. The trial of Dr. Spock, the Rev. William
Sloane Coffin, Jr., Michael Ferber, Mitchell Goodman,
and Marcus Raskin. 1969.
Kellogg, M.A. “Updating Dr. Spock.” Newsweek. March 3, 1976.
Spock, Benjamin. Decent and indecent. 1970.
Spock, Benjamin. A Teenager’s Guide to Life and Love. 1970.
Spock, Benjamin. “A way to say farewell.” Parade Magazine.
March 10, 1985.
Spock, Benjamin. Spock on parenting. 1988.
Spock, Benjamin. Spock on Spock: a memoir of growing up
with the century. 1989.
Spock, Benjamin. A better world for our children. National
Press Books, 1994.

Sports psychology
A developing subfield of psychology concerned
with applying psychological theories and research
to sports and other recreational activities.

Sports—which involve emotion, competition, cooperation, achievement, and play—provide a rich area
624

for psychological study. People involved in sports attempt to master very difficult skills, often subjecting
themselves to intense physical stress as well as social
pressure. When psychologists began studying sports in
the 1930s and 1940s, they focused on motor performance and the acquisition of motor skills. Sports psychology emerged as a distinct discipline in the 1960s,
dominated by theories of social psychology. Since then,
research has expanded into numerous areas such as imagery training, hypnosis, relaxation training,
motivation, socialization, conflict and competition,
counseling, and coaching. Specific sports and recreational specialties studied include baseball, basketball, soccer,
volleyball, tennis, golf, fencing, dance, and many others.
Three primary areas of sports research are personality, motivation, and social influence. Personality studies
have investigated whether there are specific traits that
distinguish athletes from non-athletes. Although most of
these studies failed to yield significant results, some
valid connections were made between success in athletics and positive mental health. Research on wrestlers,
runners, and oarsmen found lower levels of depression,
tension, hostility, and fatigue among more successful
athletes when compared with their peers and with the
general population. Individual differences within a sport
have also been studied. One instrument devised for this
type of investigation is the Sport Competition Anxiety
Test (SCAT), developed by Rainer Martens, which measures levels of anxiety in competitive sport. Studies of
motivation have focused on optimum arousal levels for
athletes. Mostly such studies have corroborated existing
research on arousal by relating peak performance to a
moderate, optimum arousal level, with performance diminishing if arousal is either increased or decreased
from that level. Negative effects of excess arousal include inefficient movement patterns and loss of sensitivity to environmental cues. In successful athletes, the ability to control arousal and focus attention has proven to
be as important as the level of arousal itself. Motivation
in sports has also been approached from the angle of behavior modification, with attention to such issues as the
effects of intrinsic versus extrinsic rewards.
Studies of social influence, which were predominant
in the 1960s and 1970s, focused on such issues as the influence of spectators, teammates, and competitors.
Sports psychologists have also studied specific types of
behavior. For example, the origin and effect of aggression in sports have been investigated by researchers testing the concept of sport as a cathartic release of aggression. (It was found that aggressive sports tend to increase
rather than diminish hostility and aggression.) The social
dynamics of team sports have also been studied. Psychological theories from other subfields, such as social psy-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Sports psychology

chology and behavioral psychology, have been applied
successfully to the study of sports and recreation. At
times, research has yielded findings which are different
from those seen in these more traditional areas. Contrary
to what a behavioral psychologist might predict, for instance, some studies done on coaching behaviors reveal
that effective methods of instruction are not always related to high levels of praise or positive reinforcement.
The common behavior of coaches, even successful ones,
is disproportionately composed of scolding and “hustling,” or urging on, rather than providing supportive
feedback. Another finding that goes against conventional
wisdom is that team cohesiveness in team-oriented
sports does not necessarily lead to top performance.
Following the already existing practice in Europe,
sports psychologists in North America now work directly
with professional athletes and teams to help improve performance. Techniques applied include anxiety management, progressive relaxation, autogenic training, biofeedback, hypnosis, and cognitive behavioral therapy. Mental imagery, attention control, goal-setting, and work on
interpersonal skills are also part of sports psychology
programs for athletes. Positive results have been reported
in enhancing performance and controlling anxiety.
As the study of sports psychology has grown, it has
borrowed less from other specialties, such as behaviorism, making its own contributions to the field of psychology. The unique findings in this discipline have contributed to other, more conventional areas of psychology
and are recognized as having significant applications to
the mental health of the general population. One example can be seen in numerous research reports which have
cited the benefits of jogging and other sports in alleviating depression. (Some studies have found that running is
equal to psychotherapy in its ability to relieve depressive symptoms.) Sports psychology has also gained
recognition through the popularity of such books as
Thaddeus Kostrubala’s The Joy of Running, David
Kauss’s Peak Performance, and Timothy Gallwey’s
“inner game” books. Psychologically-oriented instruction books, such as Vic Braden’s Tennis for the Future,
have also gained wide audiences. Principles developed
through sports research, such as attention control training, have also been adapted for use in business and other
organizational settings. Coaching and fitness models and
other sports psychology concepts have been used in
training managers and supervisors. Books on this topic
include Coaching for Improved Work Performance by
Ferdinand Fournies and Coaching, Learning, and Action
by B.C. Lovin and E. Casstevens.
As medical findings continue to support the role of
exercise and fitness in building and maintaining health,
people are interested in learning how they can apply re-

Speed skater Eric Heiden. Individual sports, like speed
skating, require greater self-motivation in their athletes.
(AP/Wide World Photos. Reproduced by permission.)

lated information to build skills and enjoy their activities
more fully. These individuals become likely subjects,
along with athletes, for psychologists seeking to do research or to provide counseling in the area of sports and
recreation.
While there is no specific division devoted to sports
psychology within the American Psychological Association, those involved in the discipline may join the Academy of Sport Psychology International (ASPI), the American College of Sports Medicine, the International Society of Sports Psychology, or various other organizations.
English-language journals in the field include the Journal of Sport Psychology, the International Journal of
Sport Psychology, the Journal of Sport and Social Issues,
and Psychology of Motor Behavior and Sport.
Further Reading
Bird, Anne Marie. Psychology and Sport Behavior. St. Louis:
Times Mirror/Mosby College Pub., 1986.
Cratty, Bryant J. Psychology in Contemporary Sport: Guidelines for Coaches and Athletes. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1983.
LeUnes, Arnold D. Sport Psychology: An Introduction. Chicago: Nelson-Hall, 1996.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

625

Standard progressive matrices (SPM)

Further Information
Academy of Sport Psychology International (ASPI). 6079
Northgate Rd., Columbus, Ohio 43229, (614) 846–2275.
American College of Sports Medicine. P.O. Box 1440, Indianapolis, Indiana 46206-1440, (317) 637–9200.
International Society of Sports Psychology. Department of Kinesiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
906 S. Goodwin Ave., Urbana, Illinois 61801, (217)
333–6563.

Other Helpers Need to Know about Psychological Testing. New York: Crossroad, 1992.
Walsh, W. Bruce, and Nancy E. Betz. Tests and Assessment.
2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990.

Standardized test
A test administered to a group of subjects under exactly the same experimental conditions and scored
in exactly the same way.

Standard progressive matrices
(SPM)
Assesses intelligence nonverbally in children and
adults.

The Standard Progressive Matrices (SPM) is a
group or individually administered test that nonverbally assesses intelligence in children and adults through abstract
reasoning tasks. It is sometimes called Raven’s, although
the SPM is only one of three tests that together comprise
Raven’s Progressive Matrices. Appropriate for ages 8-65,
the SPM consists of 60 problems (five sets of 12), all of
which involve completing a pattern or figure with a part
missing by choosing the correct missing piece from among
six alternatives. Patterns are arranged in order of increasing
difficulty. The test is untimed but generally takes 15-45
minutes and results in a raw score which is then converted
to a percentile ranking. The test can be given to hearingand speech-impaired children, as well as non-English
speakers. The Standard Progressive Matrices is usually
used as part of a battery of diagnostic tests, often with the
Mill Hill Vocabulary Scales. The SPM is part of a series of
three tests (Raven’s Progressive Matrices) for persons of
varying ages and/or abilities, all consisting of the same
kind of nonverbal reasoning problems. The SPM is considered an “average”-level test for the general population. The
Coloured Progressive Matrices (CPM), which includes the
two easiest sets from the SPM and a dozen other questions
of similar difficulty, is designed for five- to 11-year-olds,
persons with mental or physical handicaps, and non-English speakers. The Advanced Progressive Matrices (APM)
is generally for ages 11 to adult or, specifically, for gifted
students. It consists of a practice and screening test (Set I)
and a 36-problem series for use with persons of above-average intellectual ability.
Further Reading
McCullough, Virginia. Testing and Your Child: What You Should
Know About 150 of the Most Common Medical, Educational, and Psychological Tests. New York: Plume, 1992.
Shore, Milton F., Patrick J. Brice, and Barbara G. Love. When
Your Child Needs Testing: What Parents, Teachers, and
626

Standardized tests are used in psychology, as well as
in everyday life, to measure intelligence, aptitude,
achievement, personality, attitudes and interests. Attempts are made to standardize tests in order to eliminate
biases that may result, consciously or unconsciously,
from varied administration of the test. Standardized tests
are used to produce norms—or statistical standards—
that provide a basis for comparisons among individual
members of the group of subjects. Tests must be standardized, reliable (give consistent results), and valid (reproducible) before they can be considered useful psychological tools.
Standardized tests are highly controversial both in
psychological circles and particularly in education because true standardization is difficult to attain. Certain
requirements must be rigidly enforced. For example,
subjects must be given exactly the same amount of time
to take the test. Directions must be given using precisely the same wording from group to group, with no embellishments, encouragement, or warnings. Scoring
must be exact and consistent. Even an unwitting joke
spoken by the test administrator that relaxes the subjects or giving a test in a room that is too hot or too
cold could be considered violations of standardization
specifications. Because of the difficulty of meeting
such stringent standards, standardized tests are widely
criticized.
Critics of the use of standardized tests for measuring
educational achievement or classifying children are critical for other reasons as well. They say the establishment
of norms does not give enough specific information about
what children know. Rather, they reveal the average level
of knowledge. Secondly, critics contend that such tests
encourage educators and the public to focus their attention on groups rather than on individuals. Improving tests
scores to enhance public image or achieve public funding
become more of a focus than teaching individual children
the skills they need to advance. Another criticism is that
the tests, by nature, cannot measure knowledge of complex skills such as problem solving and critical thinking.
“Teaching to the test”—drilling students in how to an-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Statistics in psychology

swer fill-in-the-blank or multiple-choice questions—
takes precedence over instruction in more practical, less
objective skills such as writing or logic.
Achievement tests, I.Q. tests, and the StanfordBinet intelligence scales are examples of widely used
standardized tests.
Further Reading
Houts, Paul L., ed. The Myth of Measurability. New York: Hart
Publishing Co., 1977.
Wallace, Betty, and William Graves. Poisoned Apple: The BellCurve Crisis and How Our Schools Create Mediocrity
and Failure. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1995.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. Glenview, IL: Scott,
Foresman, 1988.

Stanford-Binet intelligence
scales

Abstract and visual reasoning are analyzed in StanfordBinet intelligence tests. This blindfolded subject is
matching shapes by touch. (Richard Nowitz. Photo
Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

The oldest and most influential intelligence test,
devised in 1916 by Stanford psychologist Lewis
Terman.

Consisting of questions and short tasks arranged
from easy to difficult, the Stanford-Binet measures a
wide variety of verbal and nonverbal skills. Its fifteen
tests are divided into the following four cognitive areas:
1) verbal reasoning (vocabulary, comprehension, absurdities, verbal relations); 2) quantitative reasoning (math,
number series, equation building); 3) abstract/visual reasoning (pattern analysis, matrices, paper folding and cutting, copying); and 4) short-term memory (memory for
sentences, digits, and objects, and bead memory). While
the child’s attitude and behavior during the test are
noted, they are not used to determine the result, which is
arrived at by converting a single raw score for the entire
test to a figure indicating “mental age” (the average age
of a child achieving that score). A formula is then used to
arrive at the intelligence quotient, or I.Q. An I.Q. of 100
means that the child’s chronological and mental ages
match. Traditionally, I.Q. scores of 90-109 are considered average, scores below 70 indicate mental retardation. Gifted children achieve scores of 140 or above.
Most recently revised in 1986, the Stanford-Binet intelligence test can be used with children from age two, as
well as with adults. Although some of its concepts—
such as mental age and intelligence quotient—are being
questioned, the test is still widely used to assess cognitive development and often to determine placement in
special education classes.
See also Terman, Lewis; Wechsler Intelligence
Scales.

Statistics in psychology
A branch of mathematics devoted to the collection,
compilation, display, and interpretation of numerical data.

Psychologists rely heavily on statistics to help assess the meaning of the measurements they make. Sometimes the measurements involve individuals who complete psychological tests; at other times, the measurements involve statistics that describe general properties
of groups of people or animals.
In psychological testing, the psychologist may interpret test results in light of norms, or the typical results,
provided from previous testing. In research, psychologists use two kinds of statistics, descriptive and inferential. Descriptive statistics simply give a general picture
of the scores in a given group. They include the measures of central tendency and the measures of variability.
Central tendency involves different kinds of averages:
the mean, median, and mode. Variability involves the
standard deviation, which indicates how far scores in a
group are likely to be from the average.
Inferential statistics are used to help psychologists
draw inferences, or conclusions, from the data obtained
from their research. The most common statistical tests
include the student’s T-test and the Analysis of Variance
(or F-test); these statistics help the psychologist assess
whether the differences in averages across groups are
due to the effects of an independent variable. Another
widely used inferential statistic is the correlation coefficient, which describes the strength of the relationship be-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

627

Stereotype

tween two variables. For example, there is a positive correlation between a student’s score on the Scholastic Assessment Test (SAT) and his/her grades in the first year
of college. Correlations involve patterns that exist in
groups; individuals within those groups may not perform
in the manner the correlation predicts that they will, but
if large numbers of students are tested, general trends
may be detected.
Further Reading
Anderson, David Ray. Introduction to Statistics: Concepts and
Applications. St. Paul, MN: West Pub. Co., 1990.
Bluman, Allan G. Elementary Statistics: A Step-by-Step Approach. Dubuque, IA: Wm. C. Brown Publishers, 1995.
Freund, John E. Statistics: A First Course. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1995.

Stereotype
An unvarying view about the physical appearance,
personality, or behavior of a particular group of
people.

Some people believe and perpetuate stereotypes
about particular ethnic groups: Italians are emotionally
sensitive, loud, and talk with their hands; Irish people
drink too much; Germans are serious and intelligent.
While such characteristics may apply to few members of
that ethnic group, some people characterize all people in
a certain group to share these traits. Psychologists have
also noted the role stereotypes play in human memory.
When meeting a new person, for example, people sometimes combine their firsthand perceptions of that person—appearance, personality, intelligence—with
stereotypes they have formed about similar people.
Later, when trying to describe or recall that person, the
actual characteristics become distorted by the stereotypical features that often have no relation to that person.
Television has been criticized for perpetuating
stereotypes, particularly regarding racial groups and
women. Studies have shown that early television programs, in particular, were guilty of portraying stereotyped characters. For instance, minorities were more
likely than whites to be criminals, and women were
often shown in the roles of wife, mother, or sex object.
Children proved to be especially vulnerable to the influence of these stereotypes. The civil rights movement of
the 1960s and the women’s movement of the 1970s
prompted the development of “prosocial” programs such
as Sesame Street that sought to counter racial, ethnic,
and gender stereotypes.
628

Further Reading
Liebert, Robert M.; Joyce N. Sprafkin; and Emily S. Davidson.
The Early Window: Effects of Television on Children and
Youth. New York: Pergamon Press, 1982.

Robert J. Sternberg
1949American cognitive psychologist who developed a
new model of learning and intelligence.

From childhood anxiety to a career
Robert J. Sternberg was born in December 1949 in
Newark, New Jersey. As a child growing up in Maplewood, New Jersey, Sternberg suffered from a problem
common to many children. An otherwise bright student,
he suffered such severe anxiety when taking IQ tests that
he consistently scored low. His active brain was evident
when he discovered as a sixth grader re-taking a test
among fifth graders that his anxiety was pointless. In
seventh grade, his science project was called the “Sternberg Test of Mental Ability.” He gave the test to his
classmates along with the traditional Stanford-Binet intelligence scales that he had discovered in the town library. From this point on, Sternberg devoted his time to
researching the processes of testing and learning.
As a student at Yale University, Sternberg spent his
summers working for the Psychological Corporation in
New York, and the Educational Testing Service in
Princeton, New Jersey, alongside writers who wrote
standardized test materials. While at Yale he studied
with Endel Tulving, graduating summa cum laude in
1972 with a BA in psychology. He also received the
prestigious Wohlenberg Prize and was named to Phi
Beta Kappa. Sternberg received his Ph.D. from Stanford
in 1975. While at Stanford he studied with Gordon
Bower and received the Sidney Siegel Memorial Award.
He also continued to work on investigating the analytical processes people utilize while taking intelligence
tests. Along with his work as the IBM Professor of Education and Director of Graduate Studies in the Department of Psychology at Yale, Sternberg has enjoyed a
prolific career as a writer and editor. In 1994, he served
as president of the American Psychological Association (APA) Division 1 (General) and in 1994–95 as
president of APA Division 15 (Educational). In all, he is
a fellow of nine APA divisions, and has won two APA
awards, the Distinguished Scientific Award for an Early
Career Contribution to Psychology in 1981, and the McCandless Award. Other awards have come to him from
around the world.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

His work has also extended into studying learning
disabilities in children and understanding exactly what
such a designation implies. One book he has published
on this subject is Our Labeled Children co-authored with
Elena L. Grigorenko and published in 1999.

International collaborations and a “labor of
love”
Sternberg’s research group is actively connected to
groups around the world, including Israel, Tanzania,
France, Norway, and Spain. Sternberg describes the
various projects of his students as “interrelated” while
individually developing a specific focus. For Sternberg
himself, the study of love and close relationships often
catches his greatest interest. Sternberg states that “here,
we are studying issues such as people’s conceptions of
love, the growth and decline of love over the course of
relationships, and the structure of love in different relationships.”
Sternberg not only studies love in the research setting. His marriage to Alejandra Campos, also trained in
clinical psychology, has produced two children, Seth
and Sara. Sternberg has observed that his children also
have the same test anxiety from which he suffered, even
though they are “A” students. In an interview with Psychology Today in 1986, Sternberg told Robert J. Trotter
“it’s really important to me that my work has an effect
that goes beyond the psychology journals. I really think

it’s important to bring intelligence into the real world
and the real world into intelligence.”
See also Intelligence quotient
Jane Spear
Further Reading
Paul, Annie Murphy. Sternberg: a wayward path to wisdom.
Psychology Today, May-June 1998.
Sternberg, Robert J. Successful Intelligence. New York: Simon
& Schuster, 1996.
Trotter, Robert J. Three heads are better than one. Psychology
Today, August 1986.

Stimulant drugs
Also called psychostimulants, drugs that produce
increased levels of mental and physical energy and
alertness and an elevated mood by stimulating the
central nervous system.

Stimulants are used for the treatment of certain psychiatric conditions and also used (and abused) for recreational purposes, enhanced levels of energy, and weight
loss. They may be prescription or over-the-counter medications, illegal street drugs, or ingredients in commonly
ingested substances, such as the caffeine in coffee or the
nicotine in cigarettes. Whatever their form, stimulants
increase respiration, heart rate, and blood pressure, and
their abuse can cause adverse physical effects and endanger a person’s health and even his or her life. An overdose of stimulants can result in chest pains, convulsions,
paralysis, coma, and death.

Caffeine and nicotine
The most commonly used stimulant (and the most
widely consumed drug) in the United States is caffeine.
Found in coffee, tea, soft drinks, chocolate, and drugs,
including pain relievers, diet pills, and cold and allergy
medications, caffeine belongs to a family of drugs called
methylxanthines. It works by disrupting the action of a
neurotransmitter called adenosine. Since caffeine is
usually consumed in food, it normally enters the body
through the gastrointestinal system, passing from the intestines into the blood, which circulates it through the
body. It reaches its maximum effect within 30-60 seconds from the time it is consumed, although it remains in
the body for several hours. Caffeine is addictive. People
who consume it regularly develop a tolerance for it,
meaning that they need to ingest progressively greater
amounts to continue getting the same effect. (Thus, diet

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

629

Stimulant drugs

According to a profile of Sternberg from the APA
Monitor, “Sternberg views himself as a generalist dedicated to improving the profession for all psychologists.” His book, Beyond IQ: A Triarchic Theory of
Human Intelligence, however, began to define his studies more closely. Sternberg’s compilation of the “componential” theory associated information processing
stages with specific brain functions. To that, he added
the “experiential” and “contextual,” or external, to signify the entirety of cognitive ability, re-defining intelligence. Sternberg believes that life, not what is learned
in the classroom, determines intelligence. His creative
approach to understanding human intelligence as a
composition of creativity, emotional balance, and cognitive abilities has made him a celebrity not only
among his professional colleagues, but with the general
public, especially through his books, The Triangle of
Love, Love The Way You Want It, and Love Is a Story: A
New Theory of Relationships. Sternberg has been determined to keep the integrity of his occupation at the
highest level and yet available to those other than seasoned professionals. His writing style is conversational
and not prohibitively academic.

Stimulant drugs

pills containing caffeine lose their effectiveness after a
few days, when a tolerance is established.) Caffeine
causes physical dependence, producing withdrawal
symptoms including anxiety, headaches, and fatigue
when its use is discontinued. People who stop using caffeine also experience a craving for it, which is a sign of
psychological dependence. It is generally agreed that
daily caffeine consumption equal to the amount contained in one cup of coffee or soft drink (under 240 milligrams) is probably harmless, but that consumption over
600 milligrams (the amount in four cups of coffee) can
cause anxiety, sleep and digestive disorders, a rapid
heartbeat, and other health problems. The National College Athletic Association has limited the amount of caffeine that its players can consume.
Besides caffeine, the other stimulant widely ingested is the nicotine consumed in smoking. Both caffeine
and nicotine are classified as secondary stimulants because, unlike drugs such as amphetamines and cocaine,
they affect the sympathetic nervous system more than
the central nervous system. Also unlike stimulants that
are abused for recreational purposes, caffeine and nicotine produce only an increased energy level but not a
feeling of intoxication. Nicotine acts mostly as a stimulant in new users, but long-term users claim that it relaxes them. Teenage smoking has been rising steadily
throughout the 1990s. A 1995 survey of high school students by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
found that on average 34.8% of teenagers smoke. Like
users of other addictive substances, teen smokers start
out thinking they will be able to control their use of cigarettes, but two-thirds of young people who smoke have
tried to quit and failed. Nicotine withdrawal symptoms
include anxiety, irritability, insomnia, depression,
headaches, mood swings, difficulty concentrating, and
changes in appetite.

Stimulants used for therapeutic purposes
Stimulant drugs have long been used to treat psychological disorders. In the past, psychiatrists used certain stimulants as antidepressants, but today this practice is confined primarily to seriously depressed patients
who have failed to respond to either psychotherapy or
to the wide range of other antidepressants that are currently available (and that, unlike stimulants, are not addictive). Today the primary therapeutic use of stimulants
is for the treatment of attention deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD) in children, and the most widely used
drug is Ritalin (methylphenidate). Ritalin works by facilitating the release of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine, which improves alertness, attention span, and the
ability to focus. Although it is generally considered safe
and effective for the treatment of ADHD, there is still
630

controversy surrounding the frequency with which this
medication—whose use by children doubled between
1988 and 1994—is prescribed. Side effects include insomnia, appetite loss, and stomach pains. Ritalin may
also produce withdrawal symptoms, including headache,
irritability, nausea, and abnormal chewing movements
and movements of the tongue. Other stimulants used for
ADHD (usually when Ritalin doesn’t work or produces
too many negative side effects) are Dexedrine and Cyclert (pemoline), a stimulant similar to Ritalin. Ritalin
and other stimulants have also been prescribed to prevent
daytime sleep episodes in persons suffering from severe
narcolepsy.

Abuse of illegal stimulants
The primary illegal stimulants used for recreational
purposes are amphetamines and cocaine. Street names
for various types of amphetamines include speed, uppers, dexies, bennies, ice, L.A. ice, Ecstasy, and crank.
Amphetamines produce an effect similar to that of the
hormone adrenaline, making its users feel awake, alert,
and energetic. Drugs of this type were abused by young
people as early as the 1930s, when it was popular to tear
the medicated strip out of Benzedrine nasal inhalers and
ingest them directly or in coffee. By the 1950s and 1960s
amphetamines were widely used by people who needed
to keep themselves awake through the night, such as
truck drivers and night musicians, or by athletes for extra
energy. Many young people used them to stay awake
when they needed to cram for tests or complete school
assignments. It is estimated that up to half the amphetamines sold by drug companies in the 1960s were sold illegally. After the government imposed controls on the
manufacture of these drugs, they began to be produced
illegally in home laboratories. Not only are these preparations vulnerable to contamination, they are often diluted by manufacturers and dealers. Many supposed amphetamines sold on the street contain mostly caffeine
and other drugs, with a very small percentage of amphetamine or even none at all.
The use of amphetamines declined in the 1980s as
cocaine became the drug of choice. However, in the
1990s methamphetamine (traditionally known as speed)
has become newly popular, especially among middleclass suburban teenagers, in a crystalline form—known
as ice, L.A. ice, or crank—that can either be smoked or
snorted like cocaine. Smoking methamphetamine first became fashionable in Hawaii. Use of the drug then became
widespread in California, and now it is increasing in other
parts of the country. A 1994 survey conducted at the University of Michigan found that more high school seniors
had used methamphetamine than cocaine. In 1993 alone,
the number of emergency room admissions related to the

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

People taking methamphetamine, which remains in
the body for as long as four days, quickly establish a tolerance for the drug and require ever greater amounts to
experience the same effect. Users can become addicted
within four to six months. Side effects of the drug include
a dry mouth, sweating, diarrhea, insomnia, anxiety, and
blurred vision. Severe reactions can include hallucinations (called “tweaking”), paranoia, and speech disorders, all of which may persist for up to two days after use
of the drug. In addition to physical addiction, amphetamines produce a psychological dependency on the euphoric effects produced by these drugs, especially since
when they wear off they are followed by a “crash” that
produces a depression so severe it can lead to suicide.
A related stimulant, which is derived from methamphetamine, is MDMA, also known as Ecstasy. MDMA
combines the characteristics of a stimulant and a psychedelic drug, producing hallucinations and enhanced feelings of sociability and closeness to others. It is less addictive than amphetamines but more dangerous. Persons
have died from taking this drug; some had preexisting
heart conditions, but others had no known medical problems. MDMA causes brain damage, and its use can lead
to the development of panic disorder.
Cocaine is a stimulant made from the leaves of the
coca plant. Its street names include coke, snow, toot,
blow, stardust, nose candy, and flake. When the pure drug
was first extracted from the leaves in the 19th century, its
harmful effects—including addiction—weren’t known,
and early in the 20th century it was legally sold in medicines and soft drinks, including Coca-Cola, which originally contained small amounts of the substance (from
which its name is derived). Cocaine use has been illegal
since 1914. Until the 1970s it was not widely used, except among some members of the arts community. At
first cocaine was largely used in a diluted powder form
that was inhaled. Eventually, more potent smokable
forms were developed, first “freebase” then “crack,”
which has been widely used since the 1980s. In 1988, the
National Household Survey on Drug Abuse reported that
1 in 10 Americans had used cocaine. Of young adults between the ages of 18 and 25, one in four reported having
used cocaine at some point. Cocaine also became visible

as a substance abused by celebrities, including actor John
Belushi (who died of a cocaine-heroin overdose), comedian Richard Pryor (who was badly burned freebasing cocaine), and Washington, D.C. mayor Marion Barry, who
was forced to resign from office but was later reelected.
In 1991, a government study found that 15% of high
school seniors and 21% of college students had tried cocaine, and cocaine use by teenagers continued to increase
significantly through the 1990s.
Cocaine produces a physical addiction by affecting
the brain’s chemistry and a psychological addiction because users become dependent on the confident, euphoric feeling it creates to help them cope with the stresses of
daily life. Possible negative reactions to large doses of
cocaine use include hallucinations, paranoia, aggressive
behavior, and even psychotic “breaks” with reality. Cocaine can cause heart problems, seizures, strokes, and
comas. Reactions to withdrawal from the drug are so severe that most users are unable to quit without professional help. Withdrawal symptoms, which may last for
weeks, include muscle pains and spasms, shaking, fatigue, and reduced mental function. Both inpatient and
outpatient programs are available to treat persons for cocaine addiction.
Further Reading
Carroll, Marilyn. Cocaine and Crack. The Drug Library.
Springfield, NJ: Enslow Publishers, 1994.
Chomet, Julian. Speed and Amphetamines. New York: Franklin
Watts, 1990.
DeBenedette, Valerie. Caffeine. The Drug Library. Springfield,
NJ: Enslow Publishers, 1996.
Jahanson, C.E. Cocaine: A New Epidemic. New York: Main
Line Book Co., 1992.
Lukas, Scott E. Amphetamines: Danger in the Fast Lane. New
York: Chelsea House, 1985.
Salzman, Bernard. The Handbook of Psychiatric Drugs. New
York: Henry Holt, 1996.

Further Information
Drug Abuse Clearinghouse. P.O. Box 2345, Rockville, MD
20847–2345, (301) 443–6500, (800) 729–6686.
National Cocaine Hotline. (800) COCAINE.

Stranger anxiety
Fear of people with whom a child is not familiar.

An infant learns to recognize her parents within the
first few months of birth by sight, sound, and even
smell. Up until six months, a baby will usually seem interested in other adults as well, engaging in games such
as peek-a-boo. After six months, many babies undergo a

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

631

Stranger anxiety

use of this drug increased by 61%. Crank is much cheaper to produce than cocaine, so its manufacturers realize a
larger profit (a pound can be produced for $700 and sold
for as much as $225,000). Users like it because it reaches
the brain almost immediately, and its effects last longer
than those of cocaine. It produces feelings of alertness,
euphoria, and increased energy. Like other amphetamines, crank also decreases appetite and promotes weight
loss, making it attractive to young women, who represent
50% of the teenage market for the drug.

Strange Situation

period of fear and unhappiness around anyone except
their parents. The child may burst into tears if an unknown person makes eye contact or shriek if left even
momentarily in the care of an unfamiliar person. This
stranger anxiety is a normal part of a child’s cognitive
development; the baby has learned to differentiate her
caretakers from other people and exhibits her strong
preference for familiar faces. Stranger anxiety begins
around eight or nine months and generally lasts into the
child’s second year.
Stranger anxiety can be upsetting to friends and relatives, who may feel rebuffed by a suddenly shy child.
The baby may reject a babysitter she was previously
comfortable with or grow hysterical when relatives visit.
It can also be a trying time for the child’s parents; the
baby may reject the parent who is not the principal caregiver. Furthermore, the child may be particularly upset
around people who look different to her—perhaps people with glasses, men with beards, or people of an unfamiliar skin tone. Parents should respect the child’s fear
as much as possible, and allow her to approach people as
she is able. Extra time should be spent with the child
when dropping her off at a babysitter or relative’s house.
The new face should be introduced slowly. If the child
does not want to be hugged by or sit with a relative, it is
unwise to force her. Generally, the child will outgrow his
fear and may become more sociable.
Further Reading
Greenberg, Mark T., Dante Cicchetti, and E. Mark Cummings.
Attachment in the Preschool Years: Theory, Research, and
Intervention. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990.
Watkins, Kathleen Pullan. Parent-child Attachment: A Guide to
Research. New York: Garland Publishing, 1987.
Spock, Benjamin. “Mommy, Don’t Go!” Parenting (10): JuneJuly 1996, pp. 86+.
Sroufe, L. A., and J. Fleeson. “Attachment and the Construction of Relationships.” In Hartup, W., and Z. Rubin (Eds.)
Relationships and Development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum,
1986, pp. 51-71.
Wingate, Carrie. “Separation Distress.” American Baby (58):
May 1996. pp. 20+.

would arouse in the infant both the motivation to explore and the urge to seek security. An observer (often a
researcher or therapist) takes a mother and her child
(usually around the age of 12 months) to an unfamiliar
room containing toys. A series of eight separations and
reunions are staged involving mild, but cumulative,
stress for the infant. Separation in such an unfamiliar
setting would also likely activate the child’s attachment
system and allow for a direct test of its functioning. Although no single behavior can be used to assess the quality of the infant’s attachment to the caregiver, the pattern
of the infant’s responses to the changing situation is of
interest to psychologists. The validation of the procedure
and its scoring method were grounded in the naturalistic
observation of the child’s exploration, crying, and proximity-seeking in the home.
Ainsworth’s research revealed key individual differences among children, demonstrated by the child’s reaction to the mother’s return. Ainsworth categorized these
responses into three major types:
(A) Anxious/avoidant—the child may not be distressed at the mother’s departure and may avoid or turn
away from her on her return;
(B) Securely attached—the child is distressed by the
mother’s departure and easily soothed by her on her return;
(C) Anxious/resistant—the child may stay extremely
close to the mother during the first few minutes and become highly distressed at her departure. When she returns, the child will simultaneously seek both comfort
and distance from the mother. The child’s behavior will
be characterized by crying and reaching to be held and
then attempting to leave once picked up.
Using the Strange Situation procedure, many researchers have studied the development of child attachment to the mother and to other caregivers. However,
there continues to be much debate about the origins of
the child’s reaction in the Strange Situation, and about
what factors influence the development of an infant’s attachment relationships.
Further Reading

Strange Situation
A research technique developed by American psychologist Mary Ainsworth and used in the assessment of attachment.

The Strange Situation procedure, developed by
American psychologist Mary Ainsworth, is widely used
in child development research. The goal of the Strange
Situation procedure is to provide an environment that
632

Ainsworth, M. Infancy in Uganda: Infant Care and the Growth
of Love. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press,
1967.
Ainsworth, M., M. C. Blehar, E. Waters, and S. Wall. Patterns
of Attachment: A Psychological Study of the Strange Situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Earlbaum, 1978.
Bowlby, J. A Secure Base: Parent-Child Attachment and
Healthy Human Development. New York: Basic Books,
1988.
Sroufe, L. A., and J. Fleeson. “Attachment and the Construction of Relationships.” In Hartup, W. and Z. Rubin, eds.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

TOP TEN STRESSFUL EVENTS
Death of spouse
Divorce
Marital separation
Jail term or death of close family member
Personal injury or illness
Marriage
Loss of job due to termination
Marital reconciliation or retirement
Pregnancy
Change in financial state

Stress
The physiological and psychological responses to
situations or events that disturb the equilibrium of
an organism.

While there is little consensus among psychologists
about the exact definition of stress, it is agreed that stress
results when demands placed on an organism cause unusual physical, psychological, or emotional responses. In
humans, stress originates from a multitude of sources
and causes a wide variety of responses, both positive and
negative. Despite its negative connotation, many experts
believe some level of stress is essential for well-being
and mental health.
Stressors—events or situations that cause stress—
can range from everyday hassles such as traffic jams to
chronic sources such as the threat of nuclear war or overpopulation. Much research has studied how people respond to the stresses of major life changes. The Life
Events Scale lists these events as the top ten stressors:
death of spouse, divorce, marital separation, jail term,
death of close family member, personal injury or illness,
marriage, loss of job through firing, marital reconciliation, and retirement. It is obvious from this list that even
good things—marriage, retirement, and marital reconciliation—can cause substantial stress.
When presented with a stressful event or situation,
the process of cognitive appraisal determines an individual’s response to it. One option—to judge the stressor as irrelevant—would cause little disturbance and
thus little stress. For example, a high school student
who does not plan to attend college will experience
much less stress during the Scholastic Assessment
Test (SAT) than a student who wants to attend a top
university, even though both are in the same situation.
Another option is recognizing the stressor as disturbing, yet positive. Retirement or marriage could fit into
this category. The judgment that a situation truly is
stressful would cause the most disturbance and thus
the most stress. For example, few people would consider a serious traffic accident as anything less than
stressful. The magnitude of resulting stress from any

Stress

Relationships and Development. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum,
1986, pp. 51-71.
Ainsworth, M., and S. M. Bell. “Infant Crying and Maternal
Responsiveness.” In Child Development, 1171-90.
Silver, Nan. “The ABCs of Intimacy.” Parents Magazine 71,
June 1996, p. 72+.
Spock, Benjamin. “Mommy, Don’t Go!” Parenting 10, JuneJuly 1996, pp. 86+.

Source: “What Are the Leading Causes of Stress?” In
Science and Technology Desk Reference. Edited by The
Carnegie Library of Pittsburgh Science and Technology
Department. Detroit: Gale Research, Inc. 1993, p. 415.
(Stanley Publishing. Reproduced with permission.)

situation generally depends upon a person’s perceived
ability to cope with it. If the stress is predictable—a
scheduled dentist appointment, for example—it usually causes less stress. A person’s ability to control the
stressor also can mitigate its effects. A strong network
of social support undermines the magnitude of stress
in most situations.
Reactions to stress, then, vary by individual and the
perceived threat presented by it. Psychological responses
may include cognitive impairment—as in test anxiety,
feelings of anxiety, anger, apathy, depression, and aggression. Behavioral responses may include a change in
eating or drinking habits. Physiological responses also
vary widely. The “fight or flight” response involves a
complex pattern of innate responses that occur in reaction to emergency situations. The body prepares to handle the emergency by releasing extra sugar for quick energy; heart rate, blood pressure, and breathing increase;
muscles tense; infection-preventing systems activate;
and hormones are secreted to assist in garnering energy.
The hypothalamus, often called the stress center of the
brain, controls these emergency responses to perceived
life-threatening situations.
Research has shown that stress is a contributing factor in a majority of disease cases. A relatively new area
of behavioral medicine, psychoimmunology, has been
developed to study how the body’s immune system is affected by psychological causes like stress. While it is
widely recognized that heart disease and ulcers may result from excess stress, psychoimmunologists believe
many other types of illness also result from impaired immune capabilities due to stress. Cancer, allergies, and
arthritis all may result from the body’s weakened ability
to defend itself because of stress.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

633

Stuttering

Coping with stress is a subject of great interest and
is the subject of many popular books and media coverage. One method focuses on eliminating or mitigating
the effects of the stressor itself. For example, people who
experience extreme stress when they encounter daily
traffic jams along their route to work may decide to
change their route to avoid the traffic, or change their
schedule to less busy hours. Instead of trying to modify
their response to the stressor, they attempt to alleviate the
problem itself. Generally, this problem-focused strategy
is considered the most effective way to battle stress. Another method, dealing with the effects of the stressor, is
used most often in cases in which the stress is serious
and difficult to change. Major illnesses, deaths, and catastrophes like hurricanes or airplane crashes cannot be
changed, so people use emotion-focused methods in
their attempts to cope. Examples of emotion-focused
coping include exercise, drinking, and seeking support
from emotional confidants. Defense mechanisms are
unconscious coping methods that help to bury, but not
cure, the stress. Sigmund Freud considered repression—pushing the source of stress to the unconscious—
one way of coping with stress. Rationalization and denial
are other common emotional responses to stress.
Further Reading
Tanner, Ogden. Stress. New York: Time-Life Books, 1976.

Stuttering
See Speech-language pathology

Subliminal influence
The effects of stimuli that are so weak the receiver
is unaware of their presence.

The term subliminal is derived from the Latin words
sub (below) and limen (threshold). The threshold, in this
case, is the threshold of conscious awareness. Can we be
influenced by stimuli that are so faint or brief that we are
unaware of their presence? In other words, can people be
affected by invisible stimuli? This controversial notion
has intrigued scientists and the public for decades. A public relations stunt in 1957 triggered widespread concern
that consumers were being induced to “eat popcorn” and
“drink cola” by means of subliminal messages flashed
onto a movie screen. Although there was never any good
evidence that this procedure actually worked, the possibility of such “mind control” caused considerable alarm.
634

Careful laboratory research has explored the extent to
which subliminal stimulation can affect our behavior. The
best evidence for subliminal perception comes from studies on semantic priming. In a priming task, the viewer’s
task is to decide whether or not a presented letter string
(the target) is a word or not. The task is not difficult. If the
target is a legitimate word (e.g., DOCTOR), the respondent pushes the “yes” button. If it isn’t a word (e.g., TORCOD), he pushes the “no” button. Of special interest is
how long it takes the subject to make his or her decision.
Reaction times are faster when the target is preceded by a
word whose meaning is similar to the target’s meaning
(e.g., NURSE). Thus, people will identify the target string
DOCTOR as a word more quickly if it is primed with
NURSE than they would if it were primed with an unrelated word like TRUCK. This priming effect is a well-established phenomenon. Researchers interested in subliminal
perception wondered what would happen if the prime was
presented so briefly that the viewer could not recognize it.
Would the priming effect still occur? The answer is yes,
and this finding is interesting because it shows that the
prime initiates cognitive activity in the brain, even though
the viewer does not feel as if any word recognition took
place. Thus, there is a discrepancy between what is perceived and what the viewer is aware of having perceived.
It is important to emphasize that subliminal priming
is obtained under extraordinarily artificial conditions,
and that the effect is very subtle and brief. It does not
show that people’s motives, beliefs, or behavior can be
significantly altered by secret messages. In fact, twoword subliminal primes do not appear to work. While
some researchers have reported subliminal effects of a
more profound nature than a mere priming effect, the
claims are, at best, controversial and sometimes completely false. For example, in the 1980s subliminal auditory tapes were advertised as being able to produce many
desirable effects, including weight loss, memory enhancement, and improvement of sexual function. Extensive testing by researchers has shown that these products
have no therapeutic utility.
Timothy E. Moore
Further Reading
Moore, T. E., “Subliminal Perception: Facts and Fallacies”
Skeptical Inquirer, 16, 273-281, 1992.

Suicide/Suicidal behavior
The act of taking one’s own life voluntarily and intentionally.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

rized suicide into four types. Altruistic suicide is actually
mandated by society, as in the case of suttee, where an
Indian wife commits suicide by throwing herself on her
husband’s funeral pyre. In egoistic suicide, individuals
kill themselves because they lack the social ties that
could motivate them to go on living. Anomic suicide occurs following the loss of a spouse, child, job, or other
significant connection to the community, and fatalistic
suicides are committed by people driven to despair by
dire external circumstances from which there appears to
be no escape.

Attitudes toward suicide have varied throughout history. The ancient Greeks considered it an offense against
the state, which was deprived of contributions by potentially useful citizens. The Romans, by comparison,
thought that suicide could be a noble form of death, although they legislated against persons taking their own
lives before an impending criminal conviction in order to
insure their families’ financial inheritance. Early Christianity, which downplayed the importance of life on
earth, was not critical of suicide until the fourth century,
when St. Augustine condemned it as a sin because it violated the sixth commandment (“Thou shalt not kill”).
Eventually, the Roman Catholic Church excommunicated and even denied funeral rites to people who killed
themselves. The medieval theologian St. Thomas
Aquinas condemned suicide because it usurped God’s
power over life and death, and in The Divine Comedy,
the great writer Dante placed suicides in one of the lowest circles of Hell. The view of suicide as a sin prevailed
in Western societies for hundreds of years, and many
people are still influenced by it, either consciously or unconsciously. Suicide was a felony and attempted suicide
a misdemeanor in England until 1961.

Today, many possible contributing factors are associated with suicide. Psychological disorders linked to
suicide include depression, schizophrenia, and panic
disorder. A variety of research studies indicate a possible
physiological predisposition to suicide as well. In a
study of the Amish of southeastern Pennsylvania—a
population whose close-knit community structure and
isolation from such influences as drugs and alcohol
make suicide extremely infrequent—four families accounted for 73 percent of suicides between 1880 and
1980, suggesting a hereditary tendency toward self-destructive impulses. Separate studies have found a correlation between suicide and levels of the neurotransmitter serotonin in the brain. Personality features associated with suicide include low self-esteem, impulsiveness,
and what social learning theorists call an “external locus
of control”—an orientation toward believing that one’s
fate is determined by forces beyond one’s control.

One of the greatest influences on 20th-century notions about suicide has been French sociologist Emile
Durkheim’s 1897 work Le suicide. Analyzing French
statistics on suicide, Durkheim concluded that suicide is
primarily a function of the strength or weakness of a person’s ties to family, religion, and community. Persons
with weak social ties and those for whom such ties have
been disrupted (such as divorced or widowed people) are
the most vulnerable to suicide. Durkheim also catego-

Twenty years after the publication of Durkheim’s
work, Sigmund Freud provided the first theory that addressed suicide in terms of one’s inner mental and emotional state. In Mourning and Melancholia (1917), he
proposed that suicide was the result of turning hostility
toward a loved one back on oneself. In Man Against
Himself (1936), Karl Menninger extended Freud’s contribution to the psychodynamic study of suicide, relating
it to other forms of self-destructive behavior such as alcoholism.

Social scientists have found that media coverage of
suicides can spur imitative behavior. In the 1970s, sociologist David P. Phillips found that increased numbers of
people killed themselves following front-page coverage
of suicides. He also observed that such articles had a
“copycat” effect, primarily in the geographic area where
the original suicides took place, and that the more publicity, the greater the effect of the suicide. The issue of
whether fictional accounts of suicide in movies or television influence real life behavior is more controversial
and harder to document, but evidence has been found to
link increases in both attempted and completed suicide
to the release of televised movies featuring suicide.
Probably the best-known examples of this phenomenon

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

635

Suicide/Suicidal behavior

The annual death toll from suicide worldwide is
120,000, and it is the eighth leading cause of death in the
United States, accounting for one percent of all deaths.
Between 240,000 and 600,000 people in the U.S. and
Canada attempt suicide every year, and over 30,000 succeed. The suicide rate is three times higher for men than
for women in the United States, although females make
three times as many suicide attempts as males. Traditionally, men over 45 and living alone are the demographic
group at greatest risk for suicide. However, in the past 30
years, youth suicides have risen alarmingly, tripling for
people aged 15 to 24. The suicide rate among persons
aged 10 to 24 between 1980 and 1992 rose an average of
177%. Suicide among women has also increased dramatically since 1960, when the ratio of male to female suicides was 4 to 1. Suicide rates vary significantly among
different ethnic groups in the United States; Native
Americans have the highest rate at 13.6 per 100,000 (although there are sizable variations among tribes), compared with 12.9 for European-Americans, and 5.7 for
African-Americans.

Harry Stack Sullivan

are the 37 deaths by “Russian roulette” linked to the
movie The Deer Hunter.
Suicide is the third leading cause of death among all
adolescents and the second leading cause among college
students. The rate of suicide is highest at the beginning
of the school year and at the end of each academic term.
Teenagers who contemplate or commit suicide are likely
to have family problems, such as an alcoholic parent, an
unwanted stepparent, or some other ongoing source of
conflict. The breakup of romantic relationships is among
the most common triggering factors—one study found
over a third of suicidal teens were involved in the final
stages of a relationship. Teen pregnancy can be another
contributing factor. Drug and alcohol problems are
closely related to teen suicide—one study found that
drinking had preceded about a third of all suicide attempts by teenagers. In another study, almost half of all
teens between the ages of 15 and 19 who committed suicide in a particular geographic area were found to have
had alcohol in their blood.
Various harmful myths have been perpetuated about
suicide. One is that people who talk about killing themselves do not actually do it—in fact, one of the main
warning signs of suicide is thinking and talking about it.
Another myth is the fatalistic idea that people who want
to kill themselves will keep trying until they eventually
succeed. For many people, the suicidal urge is related to a
temporary crisis that will pass. Of all people who attempt
suicide, 90 percent never try again. Yet another myth is
the idea that nothing can be done to stop someone who is
bent on suicide. Most people who feel suicidal are ambivalent about their intentions. Mental health professionals claim that all persons contemplating suicide give at
least one warning, and 80 percent provide repeated warnings. If these warnings are heeded, potential suicides can
be averted. Common warning signs include giving away
prized possessions; changes in eating or sleeping habits;
social withdrawal; declining performance at work or in
school; and violent or rebellious behavior.
Suicide can be averted when family members or
friends recognize these and other warnings and actively
seek help for a loved one contemplating suicide. Suicide
hotlines staffed by paraprofessional volunteers are an
important source of support and assistance to people
who are thinking of killing themselves. Psychotherapy
can help a troubled person build self-esteem, frustration
tolerance, and goal orientation. In cases of severe depression, antidepressant medication is an important resource;
electroconvulsive therapy is recommended for persons
who have not been helped by medication or who are so
severely suicidal that it is considered too risky to wait
until medication can take effect.
636

Further Reading
Biskup, Michael, and Carol Wekesser, eds. Suicide: Opposing
Viewpoints. San Diego: Greenhaven Press, 1992.
Colt, George Howe. The Enigma of Suicide. Fort Worth, TX:
Summit Books, 1991.
Francis, Dorothy. Suicide: A Preventable Tragedy. New York:
E. P. Dutton, 1989.

Harry Stack Sullivan
1892-1949
American psychiatrist who based his approach to
mental illness primarily upon interpersonal theory.

Harry Stack Sullivan, born on February 21, 1892,
in the farming community of Norwich, New York, was
the only surviving child of a poor Irish farmer. His
childhood was apparently a lonely one, his friends and
playmates consisting largely of the farm animals. His
mother, who was sickly, was unhappy with the family’s
poor situation, and is reported to have shown her son
little affection. These personal experiences seem to
have had a marked effect on Sullivan’s professional
views in later life.
Sullivan took his medical degree in 1917 at the
Chicago College of Medicine and Surgery. In 1919 he
began working at St. Elizabeth’s Hospital in Washington,
D.C., with William Alanson White, an early American
psychoanalyst. Clinical research at Sheppard and Enoch
Pratt Hospital occupied a portion of Sullivan’s life, as
did an appointment in the University of Maryland’s
School of Medicine. In 1936, he helped establish the
Washington School of Psychiatry. In later life, he served
as professor and head of the department of psychiatry in
Georgetown University Medical School, president of the
William Alanson White Psychiatric Foundation, editor of
Psychiatry, and chairman of the Council of Fellows of
the Washington School of Psychiatry.
Sullivan’s approach to psychiatry emphasized the
social factors which contribute to the development of
personality. He differed from Sigmund Freud in viewing the significance of the early parent-child relationship
as being not primarily sexual but, rather, as an early
quest for security by the child. It is here that one can see
Sullivan’s own childhood experiences determining the
direction of his professional thought.
Characteristic of Sullivan’s work was his attempt
to integrate multiple disciplines and ideas borrowed
from those disciplines. His interests ranged from evolution to communication, from learning to social organization. He emphasized interpersonal relations. He ob-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

In psychoanalytic theory, the part of the human
personality that represents a person’s inner values
and morals; also known as conscience.

The superego is one of three basic components of
human personality, according to Sigmund Freud. The
id is the most primitive, consisting of largely unconscious biological impulses. The ego uses reality and its
consequences to modify the behavior being urged by the
id. The superego judges actions as right or wrong based
on the person’s internal value system.
Freud believed that a child develops the superego by
storing up the moral standards learned from experience
in society and from parents and other adults. When a
parent scolds a child for hitting another child, for example, the child learns that such aggression is unacceptable. Stored in that child’s superego, or conscience, is
that moral judgment which will be used in determining
future behavior. Another component of the superego is a
person’s own concept of perfect behavior, which presents a second standard used to govern actions.
Harry Stack Sullivan (The Library of Congress. Reproduced
with permission.)

jected to studying mental illness in people isolated
from society. Personality characteristics were, he felt,
determined by the relationship between each individual
and the people in his environment. He avoided thinking of personality as a unique, individual, unchanging
entity and preferred to define it as a manifestation of
the interaction between people.
On January 14, 1949, while returning from a meeting of the executive board of the World Federation for
Mental Health, Sullivan died in Paris. He was buried in
Arlington National Cemetery.

The complex interaction among the id, the ego, and
the superego is what determines human behavior, according to Freud. A healthy balance between the more
instinctual demands of the id and the moral demands of
the superego, as negotiated by the ego, results in a “normal” or healthy personality.
Further Reading
Atkinson, Rita L.; Richard C. Atkinson; Edward E. Smith; and
Ernest R. Hilgard. Introduction to Psychology. 9th ed. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.
Zimbardo, Philip G. Psychology and Life. 12th ed. Glenview,
IL.: Scott, Foresman, 1988.

Superstition

Further Reading
Mullahy, Patrick, ed. The contributions of Harry Stack Sullivan: a symposium on interpersonal theory in psychiatry
and social science. 1952.

A belief or attitude that does not correspond to
what is generally believed to be true or rational.

Ellenberger, Henri F. The discovery of the unconscious: the
history and evolution of dynamic Psychiatry. 1970.

The study of psychology generally does not include any emphasis on these seemingly irrational beliefs that motivate behavior. Nevertheless, superstitious
actions are common in our society. Avoiding walking
under ladders in order to ward off disaster, crossing fingers for good luck, and knocking on wood surfaces to
ensure continued prosperity or avoid tragedy are examples of commonplace superstitions that have permeated
society since ancient times. Sigmund Freud called

Chapman, A. H. (Arthur Harry). Harry Stack Sullivan: his life
and his work. New York: Putnam, 1976.
Chatelaine, Kenneth L. Good me, bad me, not me: Harry Stack
Sullivan: an introduction to his thought. Dubuque, Ia.:
Kendall/Hunt Pub. Co., 1992.
Chatelaine, Kenneth L. Harry Stack Sullivan, the formative
years. Washington, DC: University Press of America, 1981.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

637

Superstition

Superego

Synapse

such superstitions “faulty actions.” Some psychologists
consider them expressions of inner tensions and anxieties. Others believe intense superstitious feelings indicate some sort of mental disorder. However, there has
been no reliable clinical correlation between superstitious beliefs and mental illness.
Further Reading
Lorie, Peter. Superstitions. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992.
Rachleff, Owen S. The Secrets of Superstitions: How They
Help, How They Hurt. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1976.

Synapse
The tiny gap through which communication between two neurons takes place.

Every thought, movement, and sensation occurs due to
communication between different neurons, which provide
information throughout the nervous system. Within a single
neuron, information proceeds through electrical signals, but

638

when information must be transmitted from one neuron to a
succeeding neuron, the transmission is chemical.
For two neurons to communicate, chemical messengers, or neurotransmitters, are released into the synaptic
cleft (a tiny gap about one thousandth of a millimeter between neurons), at which point they migrate to the next
neuron and attach themselves to locations called receptor
sites. The result is an initiation of electrical current that
moves through that neuron toward the next one. After the
neurotransmitter exerts its effect, it is either destroyed
by other chemicals in the synaptic cleft or is reabsorbed
into the original neuron. This action prevents the neurons
from becoming overstimulated.
When neurons communicate, the effect can be either
stimulation or inhibition of the next neuron. For example,
when a person pays attention to one conversation and ignore others, the neurons in the brain are actively seeking
out that information (stimulation) and actively ignoring
the rest (inhibition). Neurons come in different shapes
and sizes, affecting many other neurons, and can have
different numbers of synapses. Some neurons, called
Purkinje cells, may have as many as 100,000 synapses.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

T
Taste
The chemical sense which perceives or distinguishes flavor.

Taste, or gustation, is one of the two senses triggered
by chemical stimuli (the other is olfaction). A person has
approximately 10,000 taste buds. Most are on the tongue,
but some are located in the back of the throat. Grouped
together in bumps or papillae on the surface of the
tongue, the taste buds contain receptors that respond to

four basic tastes: sweet, salty, sour, and bitter. (It has also
been proposed that monosodium glutamate (MSG) produces a fifth taste, called “umami,” that enhances other
tastes.) Each receptor responds most strongly to one or
two of the four basic tastes and slightly to the others. The
receptors that are sensitive to bitter substances are located
on the back of the tongue. Beginning at the tip of the
tongue and progressing to the rear on each side are overlapping receptors for sweet, salty, and sour tastes. Although the number of basic tastes registered by human
taste receptors is extremely limited when compared with
the hundreds of odors that can be identified by olfactory

Bitter
Sour

Circumvallate papillae
Filiform papillae
Salt
Sweet

Fungiform papillae

Trough
Taste buds

Taste regions of the tongue (left) and taste bud anatomy (right). (Hans & Cassidy. Gale Group. Reproduced with permission.)

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

639

Television and aggression

receptors, the taste buds work together to send a unique
pattern of impulses to the brain for each substance tasted. As any gourmet or wine taster will attest, a wide range
of patterns can be created by mixing and blending the
four primary tastes in different combinations.

working on developing new artificial sweeteners to allow
consumption of sweet foods that are low in calories.

As food is chewed, its chemicals act as the stimuli
for taste, breaking down into molecules, mixing with
saliva, and infiltrating the areas that contain the receptors. Activation of the taste buds triggers nerve impulses
that travel to the brain and are there transformed into
sensations of taste. Because of their relatively “toxic”
environment, taste buds live short lives, being replaced
about every ten days. The sense of smell often works in
conjunction with our sense of taste by combining sensations to achieve the perception of flavor. In fact, the olfactory sense actually contributes more to the perception
of specific flavors than does the sense of taste. This phenomenon is commonly demonstrated in people whose
sense of taste becomes dulled by colds. It has also been
investigated in laboratory research, including tests in
which subjects detected little taste in such strong substances as peppermint, onions, and cinnamon when their
noses were congested.

Television and aggression

When a person eats, chemical stimuli taken in
through chewing and swallowing pass through an opening in the palate at the back of the mouth and move toward receptor cells located at the top of the nasal cavity,
where they are converted to olfactory nerve impulses that
travel to the brain, just as the impulses from olfactory
stimuli taken in through the nose. The olfactory and gustatory pathways are known to converge in various parts
of the brain, although it is not known exactly how the
two systems work together.
Another way to regard the relationship between
taste and smell is as two component parts of a perceptual
function identified as the “flavor system,” which also includes temperature and tactile receptors. Warm foods
seem tastier because warming releases additional aromas
from the mouth to the olfactory receptors. Warm foods
also seem sweeter, although temperature has no effect on
the perception of salty foods. A food’s tactile properties
(how it feels in one’s mouth) influence perception of its
flavor, hence distinctions such as that between smooth
and crunchy peanut butter. Pain receptors are even included among the mouth’s nerve endings involved in flavor perception, and may account for some of the appeal
of hot and spicy foods. A person’s nutritional state can
influence perceived tastes, as well as the desire for particular foods: salt deficiency and food deprivation increase the desire for salty foods. The sweet properties of
saccharin and aspartame were discovered by accident in
laboratory settings, and researchers are now actively
640

For many years, behavioral and educational researchers have studied the psychological effects of television programs on viewers, particularly children. Substantial debate over television began as early as the
1960s. The term “TV violence” was coined in 1963 as
critics accused programs of promoting antisocial violent
and aggressive behavior. More contemporary discussions
center on the use of rating systems to label the content of
programs and the use of technology to allow parents to
censor children’s viewing habits.
Although there have been cases of “copy-cat”
crimes, where an actual murder or suicide is said to have
been triggered by a specific television incident, a direct
correlation between what a person sees and does is difficult to prove. Since the 1950s, more than 3,000 studies
have been dedicated to tracing more indirect links between actual violence and televised violence. Some researchers have employed a laboratory setting where children watched either violent cartoons or more passive
children’s programming, and then measured the children’s aggressiveness. Much research has been done
comparing communities without television (such as a
town in a remote part of Canada) to similar communities
with television. Researchers have also compared crime
rates and indicators of violence and aggression in communities before and after television became available.
Such studies concluded that verbal and physical aggressiveness increased in children exposed to television. One
long-term study, carried out by a psychiatrist at the University of Michigan, tracked hundreds of subjects from
age eight to age 30, and the ones who watched the most
television were the most aggressive, were more likely to
be convicted of a serious crime, and were prone to use
violence to punish their children.
Other studies have found concomitant effects. People may become more aggressive as well as more fearful
of becoming a victim of violence. They may also become desensitized to violence and not react to help
someone who is in trouble. Not only does exposure to
television violence stimulate antisocial behavior, it also
seems to block prosocial, altruistic behavior. Other researchers note a difference between the way violence is
depicted on television and in movies, and the way violence is portrayed in literature, from fairy tales to Shakespeare, noting that television violence often seems to be
without consequences. It is not portrayed as tragic or

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Temperament

A test subject is hooked up to machines that monitor his reactions to violent television scenes. (Will & Deni McIntyre. Photo
Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

symbolic and seems an easy solution to a difficult situation. There is little differentiation between a hero’s and a
villain’s use of violence, and realistic portrayals of injured victims and perpetrators, grieving relatives and
friends, as well as other tragic consequences of violence
are often not dramatized.
There have been recurring attempts by public interest groups to censor television violence or to persuade
television industry executives to agree to censor themselves. Such campaigns run into problems, not only with
issues of free speech, but also with accountability, as the
television industry claims to be providing what their
viewers want and to be reflecting a violent society, rather
than creating one. Since television is broadcast indiscriminately, any attempt to regulate what some people
watch will impinge on the freedom of others to view
what they want. Some recent proposals for federal regulation of television violence, short of direct censorship,
resulted in a ratings system, similar to that for movies,
which includes warnings, before broadcasts, about the
possible ill effects of viewing violence.
Since 1984, all cable companies have been required
to offer a lock box that prevents certain programs from

being received. These locking devices are becoming
more sophisticated, with the advent of the so-called “Vchip”—a computer chip that can be programmed to
block out programs with violent content.
A. Woodward
Further Reading
Huesmann, L. Rowell, and Leonard D. Eron, eds. Television and
the Aggressive Child: A Cross National Comparison. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1986.
Reiss, Albert J. Jr., and Jeffrey A. Roth, eds. Understanding
and Preventing Violence. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press, 1993.

Temperament
An individual’s characteristic emotional nature, including energy level, prevailing mood and sensitivity to stimulation.

Individual variations in temperament are most readily observed in newborn babies. Even immediately after

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

641

Lewis Terman

birth, some babies are calm while others cry a lot. Some
respond favorably to being held while others squirm and
protest. Some are soothed by soft music and others do
not stop crying long enough to hear it. Because of these
immediately observable variations, temperament is often
considered a biologically based characteristic.
Hippocrates discussed variations in temperament as
early as the 5th century B.C. His hypothesis that there are
four basic human temperaments that correspond to various bodily characteristics—choleric, sanguine, melancholic, and phlegmatic— endured for many years before
modern theories became accepted. American psychologist
Gordon Allport (1897-1967), who came to dislike psychoanalytic theory and behaviorism because of their emphasis on seeking universal theories to explain all human
behavior and disorders, believed temperament was one of
three “raw materials” that distinguish individuals from
one another and from other living beings. Along with intelligence and physique, temperament was genetically determined and unique within each person. Allport wrote
that temperament includes a person’s susceptibility to
emotional stimulation, strength and speed of response,
and mood. In a longitudinal study in New York starting
in 1956 with data from more than 100 children that they
tracked through adolescence, child psychiatrists Stella
Chess and Alexander Thomas identified at birth nine different temperament characteristics. These characteristics,
which could be observed at widely varying degrees in babies influenced their development: activity level, rhythmicity or regularity in biological functions, tendency to
approach or withdraw, adaptability, threshold of responsiveness, intensity or energy level of reactions, quality of
mood, distractibility and attention span, and persistence.
From these nine dimensions emerged three major temperamental types: easy-going children, difficult children,
and slow-to-warm-up children. Chess and Thomas also
examined the goodness of fit between the individual child
and the environment of the child.
Assuming that temperamental qualities can be rated
on continuous dimensions across individuals, some approaches focus the study of temperament on traits. Isabel Myers, with her mother, Katherine Briggs, published the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator in 1962, identifying 16 different behavior patterns and drawing upon
Carl Jung’s four psychological types. The test was widely used by psychologists in individual and couples counseling, as well as in business to provide greater self-understanding. Adults as well as children display temperaments that are individually and uniquely determined by
biology. Discussion in this field has centered on the degree to which temperament is inborn nature and the degree to which temperament is nurtured or coaxed along
by an infant or child’s environment.
642

While supporting the belief that temperament is biologically based, many personality experts also maintain that temperament can develop and change over the
course of a person’s life in response to personal experiences and environmental conditions. Fussy babies can
grow to be placid toddlers. Similarly, passive infants
sometimes grow up to be classroom troublemakers. Interaction with parents, siblings, and other social contacts as well as life experiences affect an individual’s
predisposition toward a particular temperament. Doreen
Arcus in her study observed infants in their homes for
their first year of life. Highly reactive infants were less
likely to become timid and inhibited one-year-olds
when their mothers were firm and direct in their limitsetting behavior in response to infant transgressions like
pulling at plants or getting into the cat food. When
mothers were highly permissive and indirect in their discipline, highly reactive infants tended to become fearful
and inhibited. Emmy Werner in a study found that temperament could ease difficult circumstances in the environment. An easy, sociable temperament provided a protective buffer for children growing up in difficult circumstances. The environment can nurture changes both
positive and negative to reshape an infant’s natural tendencies. Natural tendencies can ameliorate or worsen
environmental situations. Acknowledging the interactions of both temperament and environment during development should make possible continued progress in
understanding of the intricate multiple influences on a
human’s life and growth. Neither temperament nor biology is destiny.
Further Reading
Bates, J.E., and Wachs, T.D. Temperament: Individual Differences at the Interface of Biology and Behavior. Washington, D.C.: APA Press, 1994.
Carey, W.B., and McDevitt, S.C. Coping With Children’s Temperament: A Guide for Professionals. New York: Basic
Books, 1995.
Chess, Stella, and Thomas, Alexander. Know Your Child.
Northvale, N.J.: Jason Aronson, 1996.

Lewis Terman
1877-1956
American psychologist whose notable work was
concentrated in the areas of intelligence testing
and the comprehensive study of intellectually gifted children.

Terman was born in Indiana and attended Indiana
University and Clark University. He served on the faculty of Stanford University as professor of education

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

A condition characterized by persistent anxiety in
test situations that is severe enough to seriously interfere with performance.

Physical symptoms of test anxiety include a rapid
heartbeat, dry mouth, sweating, stomach ache, dizziness,
and desire to urinate. The anxiety interferes with concentration and memory, making it difficult or impossible to
recall previously memorized material and resulting in test
performance that does not accurately reflect a person’s
intelligence or the amount of effort spent preparing for
the exam. Often, the memorized material is recalled once
the test is over and the person leaves the test room.

Lewis Terman (Archives of the History of American Psychology.
Reproduced with permission.)

and as professor of psychology. In 1916, Terman published the first important individual intelligence test to
be used in the United States, the Stanford-Binet Intelligence scales. This test was an American revision and
expansion of the Binet-Simon intelligence test, which
had been developed in France. Along with the StanfordBinet, Terman introduced the term intelligence quotient, or I.Q., and its formulation. This concept, and the
Stanford-Binet test, became very widely used in the
measurement of intelligence. Terman believed that society has a need to identify academically gifted children and to provide them with appropriate educational
opportunities. In 1921, he began a thoroughly exhaustive and very long term study of such children. The results of this study, which are scheduled to be announced in the year 2010, may be found in Genetic
Studies of Genius (1926). Terman’s other books include: The Measurement of Intelligence (1916), Sex
and Personality (1936), and The Gifted Child Grows
Up (1947).

People with text anxiety are usually conscientious students who work hard and have high expectations of themselves. The condition may begin with inadequate performance on a particular test, which then creates a general fear
of the testing situation that hampers future performance,
creating a vicious cycle of anxiety and low scores. Very creative students may develop test anxiety when unorthodox
responses to questions result in low grades that make them
question their own abilities and intelligence. Test anxiety
can interfere significantly with a person’s academic accomplishment and impair confidence and self-esteem.
Sometimes teachers are willing to consider alternative testing procedures, such as oral exams instead of written tests. In some cases, test anxiety can be reduced or
eliminated by having a person work on test-taking skills,
such as strategies for answering different types of questions, and then hone them through practice testing (including timed testing if this is a source of apprehension). Both
creating and taking practice tests can help defuse anxiety.
Other techniques that have been used to treat test
anxiety include hypnotherapy and biofeedback. The
beta blocker Inderal, taken on an as-needed basis, has
helped some people overcome anxiety in test situations.
Further Reading
Erwin, Bette, and Elza Teresa Dinwiddie. Test Without Trauma: How to Overcome Test Anxiety and Score Higher on
Every Test. New York: Grosset and Dunlap, 1983.

Thalamus
A collection of cell body clusters located in the
middle of the forebrain.

See also Binet, Alfred.
Further Reading
Minton, Henry L. Lewis M. Terman. New York: New York University Press, 1988.

The thalamus is a relatively large collection of cell
body clusters shaped like two small footballs. It is in-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

643

Thalamus

Test anxiety

Thematic Apperception Test

volved in receiving sensory information from the eyes
and other sense organs, processing that information, and
then transmitting it to primary sensory zones in the cerebral cortex. The thalamus also processes pain signals
from the spinal cord as well as information from different parts of the cerebral hemispheres, and relays it to the
cerebellum and the medulla. Together with the hypothalamus, the thalamus forms part of the forebrain
called the diencephalon.
By registering the sensory properties of food, such as
texture and temperature, the thalamus plays a role in appetite. It is also known to be involved in the control of
sleep and wakefulness. Cognitive researchers have found
that the thalamus activates or integrates language functions, plays a role in memory, and that a portion of the
thalamus, called the pulvinar, helps in refocusing attention. Together with the hippocampus and parts of the cortex, it is instrumental in the formation of new memories,
which are then thought to be stored in the cerebral cortex.
See also Brain.

Thematic Apperception Test
Assesses personality.

The Thematic Apperception Test is an untimed, individually administered psychological test used for personality assessment. Suitable for ages 14-40, it is used to
identify dominant drives, emotions, and conflicts, as
well as levels of emotional maturity, observational skills,
imagination, and creativity. The subject is shown a series of pictures, one at a time, and asked to make up a
story about each one, and his or her responses are evaluated by a trained psychologist. The test is usually given
in two sessions, with 10 pictures shown in each one. Sessions are untimed but generally last about an hour. (For
children ages 3-10, see Children’s Apperception Test.)

Edward Thorndike
1874-1949
American educational psychologist best known for
his experimentally derived theories of learning and
his influence on behaviorism.

Edward Thorndike was born in Williamsburg,
Massachusetts, and grew up in a succession of New
England towns where his father served as a Methodist
minister. After receiving his bachelor’s degree from
Wesleyan University, Thorndike did graduate work in
psychology, first at Harvard under the guidance of
William James and later at Columbia under James McKeen Cattell. His first major research project—undertaken while he was still a graduate student—involved
trial-and-error learning, using first chickens and then
cats. Observing the behavior of cats attempting to escape from enclosed “puzzle boxes,” Thorndike noted
that responses that produced satisfaction—escape from
the box and subsequent feeding—were “stamped in”
and more likely to be repeated in the future, while responses that led to failure, and thus dissatisfaction,
tended to be “stamped out.” Thorndike termed this observation the law of effect, one of two laws of learning
he derived from his research. The other law, called the
law of exercise, stated that associations that are practiced are stamped in, while others are extinguished. Applied to humans, these laws became an important foundation of both behaviorist psychology and modern
learning theory. Thorndike based his doctoral dissertation on his research, which he also published in the
form of a monograph in 1898. After earning his Ph.D.,
Thorndike spent a year on the faculty of Case Western
Reserve University, after which he was appointed professor of educational psychology at Columbia’s
Teachers’ College, where he remained until his retirement. Thorndike made many early and significant contributions to the field of experimental animal psychology, successfully arguing that his findings had relevant
implications for human psychology.

Further Reading
McCullough, Virginia. Testing and Your Child: What You
Should Know About 150 of the Most Common Medical,
Educational, and Psychological Tests. New York: Plume,
1992.
Shore, Milton F., Patrick J. Brice, and Barbara G. Love. When
Your Child Needs Testing: What Parents, Teachers, and
Other Helpers Need to Know about Psychological Testing. New York: Crossroad, 1992.
Walsh, W. Bruce, and Nancy E. Betz. Tests and Assessment.
2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1990.
Wodrich, David L., and Sally A. Kush. Children’s Psychological Testing: A Guide for Nonpsychologists. 2nd ed. Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing Co., 1990.
644

Upon his return to New York, Thorndike turned his
attention to a new research area—termed “transfer of
training”—which was concerned with the effect of performance in one discipline on performance in others.
The belief in such a connection had sustained the traditional system of instruction in formal disciplines, such as
the classics, through the rationale that achievement in a
given field equipped students for success in other areas.
Working together with his friend and colleague, Robert
Woodworth, Thorndike found that training in specific
tasks produced very little improvement in the ability to
perform different tasks. These findings, published in

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Further Reading
Clifford, G. J. Edward L. Thorndike: The Sane Positivist. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1984.

Edward Chace Tolman
1886-1959
American psychologist and one of the leaders of
the behaviorist movement.

Edward L. Thorndike (The Library of Congress. Reproduced
with permission.)

1901, helped undermine the tradition of formal disciplines in favor of educational methods that were more
specifically task-oriented.
Continuing to focus on human learning, Thorndike
became a pioneer in the application of psychological
principles to areas such as the teaching of reading, language acquisition, and mental testing. In 1903, he published Educational Psychology, in which he applied the
learning principles he had discovered in his animal research to humans. In the following year, Thorndike’s Introduction to the Theory of Mental and Social Measurements (1904), which provided administrators and users
of intelligence tests access to statistical data about test
results. Thorndike also devised a scale to measure children’s handwriting in 1910 and a table showing the frequency of words in English (The Teacher’s Word Book of
30,000 Words, 1944), which has been useful to researchers who rely on dictionary words. As a teacher of
teachers, Thorndike was directly and indirectly responsible for a number of curricular and methodological
changes in education throughout the United States. A
prolific writer, Thorndike produced over 450 articles and
books, including The Elements of Psychology (1905),
Animal Intelligence (1911), The Measurement of Intelli-

Edward Tolman was born on April 14, 1886, in
Newton, Massachusetts. After graduation from the Newton public schools in 1907 and from the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in 1911, he did graduate study in
psychology at Harvard. At Harvard (1911-1915), Tolman
witnessed the initial reaction of the academic world to
two new sets of psychological ideas: those of the Gestalt
psychologists (Wolfgang Köhler, Kurt Koffka, and
Max Wertheimer) and those of John B. Watson, the behaviorist.
Tolman’s later theory of behavior is rooted in
these two schools. From Gestalt psychology he borrowed the idea of pattern: in Tolman’s theory, perception, motivation, and cognition are regarded as
processes in which patterns of stimulation are identified and interpreted and patterns of reactions are
planned and executed. From behaviorism he borrowed
the idea that such mental processes must be objectively
defined in terms of behavioral properties that can be
objectively recorded. Such objectivity is necessary, he
thought, not only in our study of the mental processes
of rats, cats, monkeys, and so on, but also in our study
of our own mental processes. Whatever is private or
subjective in our mental processes is, he claimed, forever protected from scientific scrutiny because by definition such intrinsically private states have no influence on our overt behavior.
In 1918, Tolman went to the University of California at Berkeley, where he began to study maze learning
in rats—a research program that made the department of
psychology at Berkeley world-famous. In 1932, Tolman
published Purposive Behavior in Animals and Men. This
book presented Tolman’s purposive behaviorism and reviewed the new research on rat learning done in his
Berkeley laboratory.
From 1932 on, Tolman and his students turned out a
constant flood of papers on animal learning. Tolman’s

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

645

Edward Chace Tolman

gence (1926), The Fundamentals of Learning (1932),
The Psychology of Wants, Interests, and Attitudes (1935),
and Human Nature and the Social Order (1940).

Touch

Touch
The skin sense that allows us to perceive pressure
and related sensations, including temperature and
pain.

Edward Chase Tolman (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

only other book was Drives toward War (1942). This
book surveyed studies of animal behavior in search of an
explanation of the motives that drive men to war and a
description of the social controls that would have to be
enforced in a warless society. The book also shows the
strong impact of Sigmund Freud upon Tolman’s theory
of motivation.
On June 14, 1949, the regents of the University of
California handed an ultimatum to the Academic Senate: sign the new special loyalty oath or face dismissal!
On that day Tolman became the leader of the nonsigners, those who were fired by the regents for refusing to
submit to this naked attack upon academic freedom.
After a 10-year court battle, the regents’ case was repudiated by the courts: the special loyalty oath was declared unconstitutional, and the nonsigners were reinstated with back pay. On November 19, 1959, Tolman
died in Berkeley.
Further Reading
Tolman, Edward Chace. Purposive behavior in animals and
men. 1932.
Tolman, Edward Chace. Collected papers in psychology. 1951.
Taylor, Charles. The explanation of behavior. 1964.
Stewart, George R. The year of the oath 1950.
646

The sense of touch is located in the skin, which is
composed of three layers: the epidermis, dermis, and hypodermis. Different types of sensory receptors, varying
in size, shape, number, and distribution within the skin,
are responsible for relaying information about pressure,
temperature, and pain. The largest touch sensor, the
Pacinian corpuscle, is located in the hypodermis, the innermost thick fatty layer of skin, which responds to vibration. Free nerve endings—neurons that originate in
the spinal cord, enter and remain in the skin—transmit
information about temperature and pain from their location at the bottom of the epidermis. Hair receptors in the
dermis, which are wrapped around each follicle, respond
to the pressure produced when the hairs are bent. All the
sensory receptors respond not to continued pressure but
rather to changes in pressure, adapting quickly to each
new change, so that, for example, the skin is unaware of
the continual pressure produced by clothes. Once stimulated by sensation, the receptors trigger nerve impulses
which travel to the somatosensory cortex in the parietal
lobe of the brain, where they are transformed into sensations. Sensitivity to touch varies greatly among different
parts of the body. Areas that are highly sensitive, such as
the fingers and lips, correspond to a proportionately
large area of the sensory cortex.
Sensory receptors encode various types of information about objects with which the skin comes in contact.
We can tell how heavy an object is by both the firing rate
of individual neurons and by the number of neurons
stimulated. (Both the firing rate and the number of neurons are higher with a heavier object.) Changes in the firing rate of neurons tell us whether an object is stationary
or vibrating, and the spatial organization of the neurons
gives us information about its location.
The temperature of human skin is usually about
89°F (32°C). Objects or surroundings at this level—
known as physiological zero—produce no sensation of
temperature. Warmth is felt at higher temperatures and
coldness at lower ones. Some of the sensory receptors in
the skin respond specifically to changes in temperature.
These receptors are further specialized, as certain ones
sense warmth and increase their firing rates in temperatures of 95 to 115°F (33 to 46°C), while others sense
cold. Sensations of warmth and coldness are differentiated on a skin area as small as one square centimeter.
Within that area, cold will be felt at about six points and
warmth at two. When cold and warm stimuli are touched

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

With free nerve endings as receptors, pain carries information to the brain about a real or potential injury to
the body. Pain from the skin is transmitted through two
types of nerve fibers. A-delta fibers relay sharp, pricking
types of pain, while C fibers carry dull aches and burning
sensations. Pain impulses are relayed to the spinal cord,
where they interact with special neurons that transmit
signals to the thalamus and other areas of the brain.
Each neuron responds to a number of different pain
stimuli. Pain is carried by many types of neurotransmitters, a fact that has made it possible to develop numerous
types of pain-relieving medications. Many factors affect
how pain is experienced. Pain thresholds vary with the
individual and the occasion. Intensely concentrated activity may diminish or even eliminate the perception of
pain for the duration of the activity. Natural mechanisms,
including replacement by input from other senses, can
block pain sensations. The brain can also block pain by
signals sent through the spinal cord, a process that involves the neurotransmitter serotonin and natural
painkillers known as endorphins.

Tourette syndrome
A genetic, neurological disorder characterized by
motor and vocal tics and associated behavioral features including obsessions and compulsions and
hyperactivity.

Tourette syndrome (TS) affects roughly one in every
2,500 persons. The incidence of the condition is at least
three times higher in males than in females. Historically,
Tourette syndrome has been a largely misunderstood
condition; it has been identified as demonic possession,
epilepsy, schizophrenia, and other mental disorders, and
was formerly thought to be the result of emotional problems due to faulty childrearing. The condition was first
identified as a physiological disorder in 1885 by the
French neurologist Gilles de la Tourette. Although the
causes of Tourette syndrome are still not fully understood, researchers have made substantial progress in understanding and treating the condition.

in two forms: motor and vocal tics. Motor tics are uncontrollable body movements, such as blinking, grimacing,
shrugging, or tossing one’s head.Vocal tics, which involve
the muscles that produce speech, take the form of uncontrolled speech and involuntary noises, including snorting,
hissing, yelping, sniffing, grunting, throat-clearing, and
yelling. For a diagnosis of Tourette syndrome to be made,
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM-IV) of the
American Psychiatric Association specifies criteria, including multiple motor tics and at least one vocal tic, occurring numerous times every day or almost daily for a
period of over one year, with no tic-free period longer than
three months, and onset of symptoms before the age of 18.
There are two basic types of tics: simple and complex.
Simple tics are isolated movements (such as blinking,
kicking, or twitching) that involve only one part of the
body. Complex tics are more involved and take the form
of recognizable actions, such as poking, hitting, biting,
and grooming behaviors (such as smoothing one’s hair).
They also include imitating the actions of others and making involuntary obscene gestures. Complex vocal tics involve recognizable words (or animal sounds) as opposed
to simple noises. These may include the repetition of short
phrases, such as “Oh, boy,” the repetition of a single word,
repetition of the words of others (echolalia), or involuntary swearing (coprolalia), which is one of the most publicized symptoms of the disorder, although it affects fewer
than 10% of people with TS.
Besides tics, there are several types of behavior often
associated with Tourette syndrome. At least half the persons affected with TS show symptoms of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a psychological condition that
involves repeated intrusive and senseless thoughts (obsessions) and repetitive behavior (compulsions) intended to
stop them. An obsession may be an ordinary but inappropriately intense desire (such as a preoccupation with visiting a certain store) or an outlandish idea, such as a wish
to walk across the dinner table or touch a stranger. Compulsions are pointless activities that a person with OCD
can not help repeating, such as turning lights on and off,
counting things over and over, or arranging objects in a
certain pattern. OCD symptoms can be extremely debilitating, taking time away from normal pursuits, including
schoolwork and social activities. The other major behavior disorder associated with Tourette syndrome is attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), whose
symptoms include hyperactivity, inability to concentrate,
and impulse control disorders. Some persons with
Tourette syndrome have both OCD and ADHD.

Symptoms
Tics—sudden, repetitive, involuntary muscular movements—are the hallmark of Tourette syndrome, appearing

Causes and onset of Tourette syndrome
Tourette syndrome, once thought to be caused by
psychological problems, is now known to be a genetic

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

647

Tourette syndrome

at the same time, a sensation of extreme heat is felt, a
phenomenon known as “paradoxical hotness.” Touch and
temperature interact in some sensors, producing phenomena such as the fact that warm and cold objects feel
heavier than those at moderate temperatures.

Tourette syndrome

TOURETTE SYNDROME
ASSOCIATION, INC.
The Tourette Syndrome Association (TSA) is a national voluntary non-profit membership organization
whose mission it is to identify the cause, find the cure
for and control the effects of, Tourette Syndrome (TS). TS
is a neurological disorder characterized by various
motor and vocal tics, ranging from mild to severe. Members of TSA include those with the disorder, their families, and other interested and concerned individuals.
The Tourette Syndrome Association was founded in
1972 in order to disseminate information to interested
individuals, health professionals and agencies in the
fields of education and government and to coordinate
support groups for affected individuals and their families. TSA also funds research to find the cause of TS and
its ultimate cure and to find improvedmedications and
treatments. Today, its membership includes many thousands of individuals and organizations.
The activities of TSA are diverse, ranging from support and counseling to the publication of educational
materials. For instance, TSA offers direct help to families
in crisis situations through its National Service Response
Team. In addition, the Association maintains a data base
of those diagnosed with TS, sponsors a Brain Bank Program for collection of tissue needed for research, and
maintains a state-by-state list of doctors who diagnose
and treat TS. The Association also represents the interests
of members to the government on crucial policy issues.
The Tourette Syndrome Association, Inc. has available an extensive list of publications and video tapes
concerning symptoms, diagnosis and treatment options
for TS discussed in detail. TSA also publishes a quarterly
newsletter outlining the latest treatments, research programs and scientific discoveries.

disorder. About 90% of children with TS have a family
history of TS or related disorders, such as other conditions involving tics. Some persons are genetic carriers of
Tourette syndrome without actually having symptoms
themselves (these are almost always females; roughly
99% of males who carry the genetic tendency toward the
disorder develop symptoms). The biological basis for
Tourette syndrome is an imbalance in the brain’s neurotransmitters, chemicals that transport messages between
nerve cells. The main neurotransmitter affected in people with TS is dopamine, which controls movement. Research has shown that two other neurotransmitters, norepinephrine and serotonin, also play a role in the condition.
In addition, imaging techniques, such as brain scans, have
shown abnormalities in the size and functioning of certain parts of the brain in persons affected by TS.
648

Symptoms of Tourette syndrome usually appear before the age of 18. Children with TS develop their first
tics at the age of six or seven, but show other signs of the
disorder, including sleep problems, language difficulties,
and oppositional behavior, in early childhood, often by
the age of two or three. TS usually starts with a single
tic, often in the head area (most frequently repeated
blinking). The initial tics are generally simple motor tics
in the head and upper extremities. As the disorder progresses, the tics gradually move downward to include the
torso and lower extremities. Vocal tics usually begin at
about the age of nine; complex vocal tics such as coprolalia are among the last to appear. Tics in people with TS
are suppressed under certain conditions, usually during
sleep and when an individual is engaged in an activity
that requires intense concentration. In some cases, children with TS can even manage to keep their tics undercontrol voluntarily in situations where they fear embarrassment, although this takes an immense effort and afterwards the suppressed tics emerge with even greater
force than usual. The symptoms of Tourette syndrome
increase through childhood and peak during adolescence, after which their intensity usually decreases. An
estimated 20-30% of all children with TS outgrow the
condition entirely by adulthood.

Treatment
Although there is no medical cure for Tourette syndrome, medications can relieve many of its symptoms.
Currently, the medications of choice for the suppression
of tics are antihypertensives, notably Catapres, which reduces tics by 60% in most patients with only minor side
effects. Related drugs that have proven effective in tic
suppression are Tenex, another antihypertensive, and
Klonopin, an antianxiety medication. Another class of
drugs, theneuroleptics (including Haldol, Orap, and Prolixin) are even more effective than antihypertensives in
suppressing tics, but for most children their advantages
are outweighed by side effects, including concentration
and memory impairment, weight gain, and drowsiness.
In addition to drugs used for the suppression of tics,
additional medications are used to treat other behavioral
symptoms associated with Tourette syndrome. Antidepressants, such as Prozac and Anafranil, are effective in
treating obsessive compulsive symptoms, and ADHD is
commonly treated with Ritalin or other stimulants. Combining these different types of medications can be a difficult balancing act, and their effects need to be carefully
monitored by both parents and physicians. For example,
the Ritalin used for ADHD may worsen a child’s tics,
and tricyclic antidepressants such as Norpramin and
Anafranil may have to be considered as an alternative
treatment for ADHD symptoms. Another symptom of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Effects on schoolwork
In spite of the variety of possible symptoms associated with Tourette syndrome, about half of all children
who have the disorder require only minor adjustments in
order to function successfully in school. The rest require
special educational programs to accommodate their
needs. TS can disrupt a child’s schoolwork in a number
of different ways. Tics can make it difficult to concentrate or to perform certain tasks. Ironically, the effort required to suppress them can be just as disruptive because
it requires so much energy. Tics can also interfere with
the normal school experience by impeding the development of social skills if youngsters feel ostracized by their
peers because of their unusual behavior. OCD symptoms
also interfere with school performance because preoccupation with obsessive thoughts and the time spent performing compulsive actions make it difficult for children
to concentrate on and complete theiracademic tasks.
Children whose TS symptoms include ADHD have trouble with the organizational and concentration skills and
the self-control needed for successful performance in
school. Fortunately, medication helps alleviate tics and
symptoms of OCD and ADHD in many children, giving
them a better chance of succeeding in school. However,
about 40% of children with Tourette syndrome often
have additional learning disabilities that require attention, including problems with reading, math, handwriting, and spelling. In many children with TS, educational
problems peak between the ages of 11 and 13 and then
gradually decrease in severity. Parents of children with
Tourette syndrome whose symptoms interfere with their
ability to learn in a regular classroom environment
should become familiar with their children’s rights to an
individualized education program under Public Law 94142, the 1975 federal law aimed at insuring an adequate
education for children with special needs.
Further Reading
Baton Rouge Tourette’s Support Group. Toughing OutTourette’s. Baton Rouge, LA: Baton Rouge Tourette’s
Support Group,1989.
Buehrens, Adam. Hi, I’m Adam. Duarte, CA:Hope Press, 1991.
[Juvenile]

Bruun, Ruth Dowling, and Bertel Bruun. A Mind of Its Own:
Tourette’s Syndrome, A Story and a Guide. New York: Oxford University Press,1994.
Comings, David. Tourette Syndrome and Human Behavior.
Duarte, CA: Hope Press, 1990.
Fowler, Rick. The Unwelcome Companion: An Insider’s View
of Tourette Syndrome. Cashiers, NC: Silver Run Publications,1995.
Haerle, Tracy, ed. Children with Tourette Syndrome: A Parents’
Guide. Rockville, MD: Woodbine House,1992.
Koplewicz, Harold. It’s Nobody’s Fault: New Hope and Help
for Difficult Children and Their Parents. New York: Random House, 1996.
Kurlan, Roger, ed. Handbook of Tourette’s Syndrome and Related Tic and Behavioral Disorders. New York: M.
Dekker,1993.
Seligman, Adam, and John S. Hilkevich, eds. Don’t ThinkAbout Monkeys: Extraordinary Stories by People with
Tourette Syndrome. Duarte, Calif.: Hope Press, 1992.

Further Information
Tourette Syndrome Association, Inc. 42-40 Bell Boulevard,
Bayside, NY 11361–2820, (800) 237–0717, (718)
224–2999.
Tourette Syndrome Clinic. City of Hope National Medical
Center. 1500 E. Duarte Rd., Duarte, CA 91010, (818)
359–8111.

Traits
Characteristics that differ from one person to another in a continuous and consistent way.

Traits include such personality characteristics as introversion, aggressiveness, generosity, nervousness, and
creativity. Systems that address personality as a combination of qualities or dimensions are called trait theories.
The first comprehensive trait theory was that of Gordon Allport (1897-1967). Over a period of thirty years,
Allport investigated over 18,000 separate traits, proposing several principles to make this lengthy list manageable for practical purposes. One was the distinction between personal dispositions, which are peculiar to a single individual, and common traits, which can be used for
describing and comparing different people. While personal dispositions reflect the individual personality more accurately, one needs to use common traits to make any
kind of meaningful assessment of people in relation to
each other. Allport also claimed that about seven central
traits dominated each individual personality (he described
these as the type of characteristic that would appear in a
letter of recommendation). Another concept devised by
Allport was the cardinal trait—a quality so intense that it
governs virtually all of a person’s activities (Mother

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

649

Tourette syndrome

Tourette syndrome that is sometimes treated with medication is uncontrolled aggression, which may be decreased by Tegretol or lithium carbonate. Although medications are universally considered the first line of treatment for Tourette syndrome, relaxation techniques, including self-hypnosis, can also be very helpful in
reducing symptoms of the disorder, which worsen with
tension. Physical activity is also an excellent way for
children with TS to reduce tension and work off their
extra energy.

Traits

Theresa’s cardinal trait would be humanitarianism, for
example, while that of the fictional character Ebenezer
Scrooge would be avarice). Secondary traits, in contrast,
are those that govern less of a person’s behavior and are
more specific to certain situations.
Using the statistical technique of factor analysis,
Raymond B. Cattell reduced Allport’s list of traits to a
much smaller number and then proceeded to divide these
into clusters that express more basic dimensions of personality (for example, the pairs talkative-silent, open-secretive, and adventurous-cautious can all be grouped
under the overall source trait of extroversion). Eventually he arrived at 16 fundamental source traits and developed a questionnaire to measure them—the Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (16 PF)—which uses the
answers to over 100 yes-or-no questions to arrive at a
personality profile.
Hans Eysenck has also proposed a factor-analytic
trait model of human personality. However, Eysenck’s
model focuses on the following three dominant dimensions that combine various related traits: psychoticism
(characterized by various types of antisocial behavior),
introversion-extroversion, and emotionality/neuroticismstability. Eysenck has also combined the introversion-extroversion and emotionality-stability scales into a model
containing four quadrants whose groupings of traits correspond roughly to the four types of personality outlined
by the physician Hippocrates over 2,000 years ago in ancient Greece—sanguine, choleric, phlegmatic, and
melancholic.
Other trait-oriented theories include those of J.P.
Guilford and David McClelland. Currently, a number of
psychologists interested in a trait approach to personality
believe that the following five factors, rather than
Eysenck’s three, are most useful in assessing personality:
extroversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness, neuroticism, and openness to experience. A questionnaire called
the NEO Personality Inventory, often called “the big
five,” has been developed to assess these factors.

Transference is the tendency for a client in psychotherapy, known as the analysand, to transfer emotional responses to their therapists that reflect feelings
the analysand has for other significant people in his or
her life. Transference often echoes clients’ relationships
with their parents or with other persons who played a
central role in their childhood. They may become excessively dependent on or sexually attracted to the therapist; they may develop feelings of hostility or detachment. Whatever form transference takes, it is considered
to be at the heart of the therapeutic process. Sigmund
Freud believed that clients need to relive the central
emotional experiences of their lives through transference in order to become convinced of the existence and
power of their own unconscious attachments and motivations. The awareness gained through transference
helps clients understand the sources of their behavior
and actively aids them in working through and resolving
their problems.
Sigmund Freud described the workings of transference using an analogy to chemistry. Likening the clients’
symptoms to precipitates resulting from earlier emotional
attachments, he compared the therapist to a catalyst and
the effects of transference to a higher temperature at
which the symptoms could be transformed. According to
Freud, the phenomenon of transference is not unique to
the psychoanalytic relationship between client and therapist—significant patterns of relationship are commonly
re-enacted with “substitutes” other than psychotherapists.
Psychoanalysis, however, is unique in drawing attention
to this process and utilizing it for therapeutic purposes.
Further Reading
Freud, Sigmund. New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis. New York: W. W. Norton, 1933.
Hall, Calvin S. A Primer of Freudian Psychology. New York:
Harper and Row, 1982.

Further Reading

Transgender

Allport, Gordon W. Personality and Social Encounter: Selected Essays. Boston: Beacon Press, 1960.
Eysenck, Hans. The Structure of Human Personality. London:
Methuen, 1970.

Condition in which an individual wishes to live as
if he or she were of the opposite gender, sometimes
seeking surgical procedures to change from one
sex to the other.

Transference
The tendency of clients to transfer to the therapist
their emotional responses to significant people in
their lives.
650

Transgender, or transsexualism, a condition in
which the individual defines him or herself as male or female in opposition to their physical gender, or feels
strongly that he or she wants to live as a member of the
other gender, is rare. By some estimates, no more than 1
person in 350,000 believes he or she was born the wrong
gender.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

At the Netherlands Institute for Brain Research in
Amsterdam, scientists studied six male-to-female transsexuals and found evidence that a section of the hypothalamus that controls sexual function appeared to be
more like the type found in women than that found in
men. Because human embryos destined to become males
differentiate early in the development process, the
Netherlands study raises the question of whether the developing embryo could receive mixed hormonal signals
to portions of the brain and the developing genitalia.
Thus, as of the late 1990s, research seems to indicate
that there may be physical reasons for transsexualism.
Further Reading
Glausiusz, Josie. “Transsexual Brains.” Discover 17, January
1996, p. 83.
Gorman, Christine. “Trapped in the Body of a Man?” Time
146, November 13, 1995, pp. 94+.

Twins
Two children or animals born at the same birth.

Identical, or monozygotic, twins are of the same sex
and are genetically and physically similar because they
both come from one ovum, which, after fertilization, divides in two and develops into two separate individuals.
Fraternal, or dizygotic, twins occur when the mother
produces two eggs in one monthly cycle and both eggs
are fertilized. The conceptions may take place on two
separate occasions and could involve different fathers.
Fraternal twins, who are no more genetically alike than
ordinary siblings, may be of the same or different sex
and may bear some similarity of appearance. Twin pregnancies occur on the average in one out of every 80 to
100 births. However, the incidence of twins reflects the
number of twin babies born per thousand completed
pregnancies, and it is a fact that many more twins are
conceived than are born.
The causes of identical twinning are not fully understood. Factors affecting the frequency of twin and

other multiple births include the mother’s race and age,
and the number of previous births. The rate of twin
births in Japan is 0.7 percent, while the Yoruba of Nigeria have a rate as high as 4 percent. Dizygotic twinning
appears to be a sex-linked genetic trait passed on by female relatives in the same family. The chances of having fraternal twins are increased about five times if a
woman is a fraternal twin, has fraternal twin siblings or
fraternal twin relatives on her side of the family, or has
already given birth to fraternal twins (one in twenty
chance). While the rate of identical twin births is stable
for all ages of childbearing women, the chance of any
mother bearing fraternal twins increases from the age
of 15 to 39 and then drops after age 40. For women of
all ages, the more children they have had previously,
the more likely they are to bear twins. Since the 1960s,
fertility drugs have also been linked to the chances of
producing twins. The majority of research indicates
that fathers’ genes have little effect on the chances of
producing twins.
There are four types of monozygotic twins, determined by the manner in which the fertilized egg, or zygote, divides and the stage at which this occurs. Two independent embryonic structures may be produced immediately at division, or the zygote may form two inner
cell masses, with each developing into an embryo. A
late or incomplete division may produce conjoined, or
Siamese twins. As the zygote develops, it is encased in
membranes, the inner of which is called the amnion, and
the outer one the chorion. Among monozygotic twins,
either or both of these membranes may be either separate or shared, as may the placenta. Together, the
arrangement of these membranes and the placenta occurs in four possible permutations. Among dizygotic
twins, each one has separate amnion and chorion membranes, although the placenta may be shared. Ascertaining zygosity, or the genetic make up of twins, can be
done by analyzing the placenta(s) to determine if it is a
single placenta with a single membrane or a double placenta, which account for one-third of identical twins
and all fraternal twins. In the case of same-sex twins
with two placentas, a DNA or blood test can determine
whether they share the same genes or blood groups.
The scientific study of twins, pioneered by Sir
Francis Galton in 1876, is one effective means of determining genetic influences on human behavior. The most
widely used method of comparison is comparing
monozygotic and dizygotic twins for concordance and
discordance of traits. Concordant traits are those possessed by either both or neither of a pair of twins; discordant traits are possessed by only one of the pair.
Monozygotic twins who are discordant for a particular
trait can be compared with each other with reference to

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

651

Twins

As they progress through childhood, their inability
to relate to their own gender identity increases. Some
seek the advice of a physician, and by the time they
reach early adulthood, begin to take medical action to
alter their gender. Since more males than females are diagnosed as transsexuals, it is more common for males to
receive hormone treatment to develop secondary sex
characteristics, such as breasts. In some cases, a surgical
procedure is performed to alter the male sex organs to
physically complete the transformation from one gender
to the other.

Twins
These identical twins in San Francisco make an effort to act and dress alike. (Alison Wright. Photo Researchers, Inc.
Reproduced with permission.)

other traits. This type of study has provided valuable information on the causes of schizophrenia.
Another common type of twin research compares
monozygotic twins reared together with those reared
apart, providing valuable information about the role of environment in determining behavior. In general, monozygotic twins reared apart are found to bear more similarities
to each other than to their respective adoptive parents or
siblings. This finding demonstrates the interaction between the effects of environment and genetic predispositions on an individual’s psychological development.
See also Nature-Nurture Controversy.

Type A personality
A collection of traits consisting of competitiveness,
urgency, high achievement, and irritability.

In the 1970s, psychologists started investigating
possible links between personality and health. Initial
652

research seemed to indicate that persons with a type A
Personality were at higher risk for coronary heart disease—a medical condition that consists of a narrowing
of the blood vessels that supply blood to the heart.
Type A people are achievement oriented, irritable, impatient with delays, and seem to be always in a hurry.
The association between heart disease and type A behaviors was evident, even when other risk factors such
as smoking, obesity, or family history were ruled out.
In contrast to type As, type B people are less competitive, and more easygoing than their type A counterparts. In a traffic jam, a type A might curse, fume, and
change lanes. A type B might relax and listen to the car
stereo. While most people do not fall into the extreme
ends of the continuum, there are significant numbers
of people who do seem to be far more intense and reactive than others.
These initial findings provoked widespread public
interest. Checklists in the popular press allowed people
to identify their own personality type. But subsequent
studies showed that the relationship between type A behavior and heart disease was less clear than the initial

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

More recent research has demonstrated that the feature of type A behavior that is particularly “toxic” is hostility. Men who are cynical, resentful, chronically angry,
and mistrustful are far more likely than non-hostile men
to get heart disease. The picture is less clear for women
because fewer women have been included in the studies.
The physiological explanation of the link between hostility and heart disease continues to be a focus of research.
Timothy Moore
Further Reading
Miller, T., et al. A meta-analytic review of research on hostility
and physical health. Psychological Bulletin, 119, 322348, 1996.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

653

Type A personality

study had suggested. In the initial 1974 study, over 3,000
men aged 35 to 59 were interviewed and classified as either type A or type B. Of those who suffered a heart attack during the next nine years, 69% were type As. However, if they survived the first attack, they subsequently
lived longer than the type Bs. What could account for
this apparent contradiction? It turns out that the description of type A behavior needs to be more carefully refined if we are to learn anything useful about its link
with heart disease. Type As are not only reactive, they
are also achievement oriented and highly motivated to
succeed. They enjoy challenge and like to know how
well they are doing. These qualities are likely to cause
heart attack victims to change their lifestyles in order to
prevent a recurrence.

U
Unconscious

Unconscious motivation

The part of the mind whose contents people resist
bringing into awareness.

Motivating impulses that influence behavior without conscious awareness.

Sigmund Freud assumed that the human mind
was divided into three divisions: the id, ego, and superego, which, in turn, had both conscious and unconscious portions. The id, motivated by two biological
drives—sex and aggression—operates according to the
pleasure principle, seeking satisfaction and avoiding
pain. Guided by the reality principle, the ego’s goal is
to find safe and socially acceptable ways of satisfying
the id’s desires without transgressing the limits imposed by the superego. Developing from the ego in
childhood, the superego, or conscience, has as its goal
to apply moral values in satisfying one’s wishes. Both
the ego and superego operate consciously and unconsciously, according to Freud, while the id is entirely unconscious.

Unconscious motivation plays a prominent role in
Sigmund Freud’s theories of human behavior. According
to Freud and his followers, most human behavior is the
result of desires, impulses, and memories that have been
repressed into an unconscious state, yet still influence
actions. Freud believed that the human mind consists of
a tiny, conscious part that is available for direct observation and a much larger subconscious portion that plays
an even more important role in determining behavior.

In psychoanalytic theory, developed by Freud in the
treatment of normal and abnormal personalities, the
preconscious and unconscious minds are the repositories of secret or sexual desires that threaten our self-esteem, or ego. Once in the unconscious, these repressed
desires and fears give rise to anxiety and guilt, which influence conscious behavior and thoughts. Freud attributed the cause of many psychological disorders to the
conflict between conscious and unconscious urges. In
order to understand abnormal behaviors and eliminate
them, he theorized, an expert was required, who, in a
trusting relationship with the patient, would employ
techniques such as dream analysis and free association
to retrieve materials buried in the unconscious mind.
Thus, the driving forces behind behavior could be understood, and unresolved unconscious conflicts and anxiety
could become a source of insight for the patient, eliminating the primary source of abnormal behavior.
See also Repression.
654

The term “Freudian slip” refers to the manifestation
of these unconscious impulses. For example, a person
who responds “Bad to meet you” instead of the usual
“Glad to meet you” may be revealing true feelings. The
substitution of “bad” for “glad” is more than a slip of the
tongue; it is an expression of the person’s unconscious
feelings of fear or dislike. Similarly, a talented athlete
who plays an uncharacteristically poor game could be
acting on an unconscious desire to punish overbearing or
inattentive parents. Unknown to the athlete, the substandard performance actually is communicating an important message.
Freud also contended that repressed memories and
desires are the origins of most mental disorders. Psychoanalysis was developed as a method of assisting patients
in bringing their unconscious thoughts to consciousness.
This increased awareness of the causes for behavior and
feelings then would assist the patient in modifying the
undesired aspects of behavior.
See also Memory; Repression.
Further Reading
Atkinson, Rita L.; Richard C. Atkinson; Edward E. Smith; and
Ernest R. Hilgard. Introduction to Psychology. 9th ed. San
Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Underachiever
Also referred to as a latent achiever, a person whose
performance is significantly below that which
would be predicted by educators.

Although the term “underachiever” commonly
refers to anyone, child or adult, who performs below his
or her potential, psychologists typically use the term to
refer to a student whose performance in academic studies falls significantly below his scores on standardized
tests of aptitude or ability. A student may also be considered to be underachieving based on the educator’s evaluation of her learning potential in relation to the quality of
the work she does on class assignments.
There are many explanations for achievement that
falls below evaluated potential. Some problems may be
the educational experience itself: bright students may
be bored by class assignments, and therefore do not
give them much attention; or a student’s learning style
may conflict with the method of instruction used in his
school. Underachievers may also have learning disabilities that prevent them from making full use of their
capabilities. Family factors may also contribute to a
pattern of underachievement in a variety of ways.
When parents’ expectations are low or nonexistent (the
family doesn’t expect the student to do more than
pass), the student may work “just hard enough”—well
below his full potential—to get by. When a student’s
peer group does not value academic achievement, peer

pressure may be another factor contributing to underachievement.
Parents, educators, and the student can all work together to counter underachievement. First, working with
the family and school personnel, the student must understand the factors that contribute to low academic
achievement. Factors may include poor time management, self-defeating thought patterns (“I could never get
a B in science.”), weak writing skills, poor (or no) study
environment (i.e., homework done while watching television), friends or role models who do not value academic performance, or self-destructive habits like alcohol or
drug abuse. Next, the student needs to acknowledge that
she could be more successful in school. Parents and
teachers can help the student compile a list of strengths,
both academic and other, that she can build upon. They
can also help direct the student to peer groups (through
clubs, sports, or other extracurricular activities) that support academic success. In addition, role models can be
presented to the student to help her focus on the possibilities in academic life, rather than the limitations. Finally,
where necessary, families can seek counseling and treatment for problems such as alcohol abuse that prevent the
student from focusing on school.
Further Reading
Griffin, Robert S. Underachievers in Secondary School: Education Off the Mark. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 1988.
Holt, John. How Children Fail. Revised edition. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1995.
Lehr, Judy Brown. At-Risk, Low-Achieving Students in the
Classroom. Washington, D.C.: National Education Association, 1988.
Varma, Ved. How and Why Children Fail. Philadelphia: J.
Kingsley, 1993.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

655

Underachiever

Clark, David Stafford. What Freud Really Said. New York:
Schocken Books, 1965.

V
Violence
The use of unjustified physical force with the intention to injure or damage.

The high incidence of violence in the United
States is of great concern to citizens, lawmakers, and
law enforcement agencies alike. Between 1960 and
1991, violent crime in the U.S. rose over 370 percent,
and over 600,000 Americans are victimized by handgun crimes annually. Violent acts committed by juveniles are of particular concern: the number of American adolescents arrested for homicide has increased by
85 percent between 1987 and 1991, and more juveniles
are committing serious crimes at younger ages than
ever before. Young African American males are particularly at risk for becoming either perpetrators or victims of violent crime. The Centers for Disease Control
(CDC) has identified homicide as the leading cause of
death for this demographic group, estimating that one
in every 28 black males born in 1987 is likely to be
murdered. For white males born in 1987, the ratio is
one in 205.
The threat of violence is particularly disturbing because of new variants—including carjackings, drive-by
shootings, and workplace killings—that threaten Americans in places or situations formerly considered safe.
The CDC has declared workplace violence an epidemic, with the number of homicides in the workplace
tripling in the last ten years. Workplace violence may
be divided into two types: external and internal. External workplace violence is committed by persons unfamiliar with the employer and employees, occurring at
random or as an attempt at making a symbolic statement to society at large. Internal workplace violence is
generally committed by an individual involved in either
a troubled spousal or personal relationship with a coworker, or as an attempt to seek revenge against an employer, usually for being released from employment.
The rising percentage of layoffs, downsizing, and im656

personal management styles in many American corporations have been linked to the increase in workplace
violence, nearly one-fourth of which end in the perpetrator’s suicide.
One type of violence that has received increased attention in recent years is domestic violence, a crime for
which statistics are difficult to compile because it is so
heavily underreported—only about one in 270 incidents
are thought to be reported to authorities. Estimates of the
percentage of women who have been physically abused
by a spouse or partner range from 20 percent to as high
as 50 percent. According to the FBI, a woman is beaten
every 18 seconds in the United States, and almost onethird of American females murdered in 1992 were killed
by their husbands or boyfriends. Battering is experienced
by women of all ages, races, ethnic groups, and social
classes. A chronic pattern of ongoing physical violence
and verbal abuse may produce a variant of post-traumatic stress disorder referred to as Battered Woman Syndrome, in which the victim experiences depression,
guilt, passivity, fear, and low self-esteem.
Various explanations have been offered for the high
prevalence of violence in the United States, which is by
far the most violent nation in the industrialized world.
Among the most prominent has been the argument that
violence depicted in the mass media—including television, movies, rock and rap music videos, and video
games—have contributed to the rise in violence in society. Quantitative studies have found that prime time
television programs average 10 violent acts per hour,
while children’s cartoons average 32 acts of violence
per hour. On-screen deaths in feature films such as
Robocop and Die Hard range from 80 to 264. It has also
been argued that experiencing violence vicariously in
these forms is not a significant determinant of violent
behavior and that it may even have a beneficial cathartic
effect. However, experimental studies have found correlations between the viewing of violence and increased
interpersonal aggression, both in childhood and, later,
in adolescence. Viewing violence can elicit aggressive

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Violence

The fence surrounding the Murrah Federal Building in Oklahoma City bears the memories of the victims of the building’s
1995 bombing. Violent crime rates in the U.S. have dramatically increased in recent years. (Pat J. Carter. AP/Wide World
Photos. Reproduced with permission.)

behavior through modeling, increasing the viewer’s
arousal, desensitizing viewers to violence, reducing restraints on aggressive behavior, and distorting views
about conflict resolution.
Other causal factors that have been linked to violence include the prevalence of gangs, the introduction of
crack cocaine in the mid-1980s, the increase in singleparent families, and the lack of tighter restrictions on gun
ownership. In addition, scientists have found a possible
link between violence and heredity: studies have shown
that males born with an extra Y chromosome (type XYY)
are more likely than normal to be inmates of prisons or
mental hospitals. The significance of these findings has
been disputed, however, as XYY males in the general
population are not more violent than other males. The effects of a genetic predisposition are also tempered by interaction with a variety of environmental factors. Of the
men who are genetically predisposed to violence, only a
minority will actually commit acts of aggression.
There are a number of more credible predictors of
individual violence, most of them psychological. The
most reliable indicator is a history of violence: each time

a person commits a violent act, the probability that he or
she will commit more violent acts increases. Psychoses,
including schizophrenia, major affective disorders, and
paranoid states are also closely linked to violence, as is
erotomania, or romantic obsession. This condition involves an idealized romantic love (often for someone,
such as a celebrity, with whom one has no personal relationship) that becomes a fixation. Such actions as unsolicited letters and phone calls, and stalking eventually
lead to violence, either out of revenge for being rejected
or so that the object of the fixation may not become involved with anyone else.
Depression is also associated with violence, often in
the form of suicide. Two personality disorders related to
violence—particularly in the workplace—are antisocial
personality disorder (“sociopaths”) and borderline
personality disorder (characterized by instability and
lack of boundaries in interpersonal relationships). Chemical dependence can lead to violence by interfering with
the ability to distinguish right from wrong, removing social inhibitions, and inducing paranoia and/or aggression. Other possible indicators of violence include neurological impairment, an excessive interest in weapons, a

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

657

Vision

high level of frustration with one’s environment, and the
pathological blaming of others for one’s problems.
In recent years, a public health approach to violence
has been widely advocated. This orientation stresses outreach to those segments of the population among whom
violence is most prevalent in an attempt to alter attitudes
and behaviors that contribute to it, and to teach the skills
necessary for the nonviolent resolution of conflicts.
Teenagers, in particular, as well as their parents, are targeted in these efforts, especially in areas with high crime
rates. This approach has been criticized by those who believe that violence should be dealt with by addressing its
underlying structural causes—including poverty, racial

discrimination, and unemployment—through direct socioeconomic intervention.

Vision
The process of transforming light energy into neural impulses that can then be interpreted by the
brain.

The human eye is sensitive to only a limited range
of radiation, consisting of wavelengths between approximately 400 to 750 nanometers (billionths of a meter).

A human has a field of vision that covers almost 180°, although binocular
vision is limited to the approximately 120° common to both eyes. The field
extends upward about 60° and down about 75°

Eye

Optic nerve

Optic chiasm
Optic tract
Lateral
geniculate
nucleus
Optic radiations

Primary visual cortex
Because the nerve fibers from the left half of the retina of the left eye go to
the left side of the brain and fibers from the left half of the right eye cross
the optic chiasm and go to the left side of the brain as well, all the
information from the two left half-retinas ends up in the left half of the brain.
And because the lens of the eye reverses the image it sees, it is information
from the right half of the visual field that is going to the left visual cortex.
Likewise, information from the left half of the visual field goes to the right
visual cortex.

How the eye works. (Hans & Cassidy. Gale Research. Reproduced with permission.)

658

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The retina, lining the back of the eye, consists of ten
layers of cells containing photoreceptors (rods and cones)
that convert the light waves to neural impulses through a
photochemical reaction. Aside from the differences in
shape suggested by their names, rod and cone cells contain different light-processing chemicals (photopigments), perform different functions, and are distributed
differently within the retina. Cone cells, which provide
color vision and enable us to distinguish details, adapt
quickly to light and are most useful in adequate lighting.
Rod cells, which can pick up very small amounts of light
but are not color-sensitive, are best suited for situations in
which lighting is minimal. Because the rod cells are active at night or in dim lighting, it is difficult to distinguish
colors under these circumstances. Cones are concentrated
in the fovea, an area at the center of the retina, whereas
rods are found only outside this area and become more
numerous the farther they are from it. Thus, it is more difficult to distinguish colors when viewing objects at the
periphery of one’s visual field.
The photoreceptor cells of the retina generate an
electrical force that triggers impulses in neighboring
bipolar and ganglion cells. These impulses flow from the
back layer of retinal cells to the front layer containing
the fibers of the optic nerve, which leaves the eye
though a part of the retina known as the optic disk. This

area, which contains no receptor cells, creates a blind
spot in each eye, whose effects are offset by using both
eyes together and also by an illusion the brain creates to
fill in this area when one eye is used alone. Branches of
the optic nerve cross at a junction in the brain in front of
the pituitary gland and underneath the frontal lobes
called the optic chiasm and ascend into the brain itself.
The nerve fibers extend to a part of the thalamus called
the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN), and neurons from
the LGN relay their visual input to the primary visual
cortex of both the left and right hemispheres of the brain,
where the impulses are transformed into simple visual
sensations. (Objects in the left visual field are viewed
only through the right brain hemisphere, and vice versa.)
The primary visual cortex then sends the impulses to
neighboring association areas which add meaning or “associations” to them.
Further Reading
Hubel, David. Eye, Brain, and Vision. New York: Scientific
American Library, 1987.

Visual angle
In viewing an object through one eye, the visual
angle is the angle formed at the nodal point of the eye by
straight lines from opposite edges of the object.

Vocational Aptitude Test
A predictive test designed to measure an individual’s potential for success and satisfaction in any of
various occupations and professions.

As a general example, a vocational aptitude test
might consist of an instrument that assesses an individual’s abilities, personality characteristics, and interests,
and compares the individual’s responses to those persons
considered to be successful in their occupations and professions, with a notation of points of similarity and dissimilarity.
Vocational aptitude tests are valuable to both employers and prospective employees in a given occupation. To the prospective employee, the test results offer
guidance in choosing a particular career. To the employer, they aid in the process of screening suitable employees. Vocational aptitude tests measure a wider variety of
skill areas than scholastic aptitude tests. For example,
the Differential Aptitude Test, one of the most widely
used vocational tests, measures verbal, numerical, ab-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

659

Vocational Aptitude Test

The full spectrum of visible color is contained within
this range, with violet at the low end and red at the high
end. Light is converted into neural impulses by the eye,
whose spherical shape is maintained by its outermost
layer, the sclera. When a beam of light is reflected off an
object, it first enters the eye through the cornea, a rounded transparent portion of the sclera that covers the pigmented iris. The iris constricts to control the amount of
light entering the pupil, a round opening at the front of
the eye. A short distance beyond the pupil, the light passes through the lens, a transparent oval structure whose
curved surface bends and focuses the light wave into a
narrower beam, which is received by the retina. When
the retina receives an image, it is upside down because
light rays from the top of the object are focused at the
bottom of the retina, and vice versa. This upside-down
image must be rearranged by the brain so that objects
can be seen right side up. In order for the image to be focused properly, light rays from each of its points must
converge at a point on the retina, rather than in front of
or behind it. Aided by the surrounding muscles, the lens
of the eye adjusts its shape to focus images properly on
the retina so that objects viewed at different distances
can be brought into focus, a process known as accommodation. As people age, this process is impaired because
the lens loses flexibility, and it becomes difficult to read
or do close work without glasses.

Voyeurism

stract, and mechanical reasoning; spatial relations; clerical speed and accuracy; and language usage.
Vocational aptitude tests have three primary orientations. The interactional perspective stresses the interaction between the individual and the work environment
as the determining factor in vocational success and satisfaction. The theories of John Holland and the widely
used tests based on them are an example of this approach. The central focus for Holland is congruence between an individual’s personality type (realistic, investigative, artistic, social, enterprising, or conventional)
and his or her vocational environment. Research has indicated that congruent person-environment interactions
lead to personal and vocational stability and fulfillment.
Tests based on the person perspective emphasize the
individual, rather than the work environment, as the crucial variable in vocational success. Theories associated
with this orientation include Osipow’s Trait Factor ap-

660

proach, focusing on personal characteristics linking an
individual to various vocational groups, and Super’s developmental self-concept theory, which regards vocational choice as a means of self-expression. Roe’s personality theory concentrates on individuals employed in
scientific fields and their relative degree of interest in
people and things. Finally, the environment perspective
views vocational choice and performance as primarily a
function of environmental or situational factors.
Further Reading
Gale, Barry. Discover What You’re Best At. New York: Simon
& Schuster, 1990.

Voyeurism
See Paraphilias

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

W
Margaret Floy Washburn
1871-1939
American psychologist.

Margaret Floy Washburn was the first woman ever
to receive a doctorate in psychology and the second
woman to be elected to the National Academy of Sciences (1931), the most eminent scientific society in the
United States. The only child of Francis Washburn and
Elizabeth Floy Davis, Washburn was raised in a middle
class home in New York. The women in her family were
exceptional and attained high levels of academic accomplishment for the era. Educated both in public and private schools, Washburn graduated from Vassar College
in 1891 with a keen interest in science and philosophy.
She audited graduate courses taught by James McKeen
Cattell at Columbia University, but in spite of his full
support, she was denied admission to the graduate program due to gender restrictions. Admitted as a degree
candidate at Cornell University, she won the Susan Lynn
Sage Fellowship in Philosophy and Ethics. In two short
years, working with the noted researcher Edward B.
Titchener (1886-1927) in experimental psychology,
Washburn earned her Ph.D., the first woman ever to receive a doctorate in psychology. In 1894, she was elected
to membership in the American Psychological Association where she eventually became a council member, establishing policy and serving on many committees.
Because women were not eligible to be hired as regular faculty in psychology or philosophy departments in
any major Eastern university at the close of the nineteenth century, Washburn held a series of teaching positions at women’s colleges, including Wells College
(1894), Sage College at Cornell University (1900) and
the University of Cincinnati (1902). Although Edward
Titchener had been her mentor at Cornell, he refused to
admit her to the Society of Experimental Psychologists
he formed in 1904. While this group was expressly designed to help young researchers, he summarily exclud-

Margaret Floy Washburn (Archives of the History of American
Psychology. Reproduced with permission.)

ed all women on the grounds that their presence would
inhibit “frank discussion” among the male members. In
1903, Washburn became Assistant Professor of Philosophy at Vassar College, where she was promoted to professor in 1908, eventually becoming professor emeritus
in 1937.
Washburn was known primarily for her work in animal psychology. The Animal Mind, which she published
in 1908, was the first book by an American in this field
and remained the standard comparative psychology
textbook for the next 25 years. (Subsequent editions appeared in 1917, 1926, and 1936.) In Movement and Men-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

661

John Broadus Watson

tal Imagery (1916), she presented her motor theory of
consciousness, in which she attempted to mediate between the structuralist, or “introspective” tradition of
Wilhelm Wundt (1832-1920) and Titchener, in which
she had been schooled, and the opposing behaviorist
view. These competing movements had divorced consciousness from behavior, with the structuralists studying only the former, while the behaviorists maintained
that psychology should only be concerned with the latter.
Washburn’s theory reconciled these two perspectives by
exploring the ways in which thoughts and perceptions
produce motor reaction.
In 1925, Washburn was named one of four coeditors
of the American Journal of Psychology. She was elected
president of the American Psychological Association in
1921 and elected to the National Academy of Sciences in
1931, the second woman ever to be chosen for that
honor. Altogether, Washburn published over 200 articles
and reviews, including more than 70 research articles
during her 33-year tenure at Vassar. In her writings, she
developed her theory of consciousness at greater length
and explored such diverse topics as individual differences, color vision in animals, aesthetic preferences for
colors and sounds, after-images, and psychology of the
affective processes.
Further Reading
Scarborough, Elizabeth, and Laurel Furumoto. Untold Lives:
The First Generation of American Women Psychologists.
New York: Columbia University Press, 1987, pp. 109-29.

John Broadus Watson
1878-1958
American psychologist and founder of behaviorism.

John Broadus Watson is best known as the founder
of behaviorism, which he defined as an experimental
branch of natural science aimed at the prediction and control of behavior. Its model was based on Ivan Pavlov’s
studies of conditioned reflex: every conduct is a response
to a stimulus or to a complex set of stimulus situations.
From birth, a few stimuli elicit definite reactions. But
most behaviors are conditioned; they result from the association of unconditioned stimuli to other stimuli.
Watson was born in 1878 to a poor, rural South Carolina family. His mother was a pious Baptist; his father
left the family in 1891. After taking a traditional classical
curriculum at Furman University, he studied philosophy
at the University of Chicago. Disappointed with John
Dewey’s teaching, he began work in animal psychology,
and received his Ph.D. in 1903. Watson was a professor at
662

Johns Hopkins University from 1908 to 1920, when he
was dismissed because of his relationship with a graduate
student, Rosalie Rayner. He divorced his wife, married
Rosalie, and had a successful career in advertising. In
1957, he was awarded a gold medal by the American Psychological Association (of which he had been the
youngest president, in 1915). Watson died in 1958.
Developmental issues were crucial for behaviorism.
According to Watson, unhealthy adult personalities resulted from habit systems carried over from infancy.
Early childhood was key, and a detailed knowledge of
child development was indispensable for designing a
behavioral social technology. The significance of childhood and child-study for behaviorism is summed up in
Watson’s most famous statement: “Give me a dozen
healthy infants . . . and my own specified world to bring
them up in and I’ll guarantee to take any one at random
and train him to become any type of specialist I might
select . . . regardless of his talents, penchants, tendencies,
abilities, vocations, and the race of his ancestors.”
By 1917, Watson had focused his research on children. He carried out pioneering observational and experimental work on newborns and infants, produced Experimental Investigation of Babies (1919), one of the first psychology films done in the United States, wrote the bestselling manual Psychological Care of Infant and Child,
and became a popular child-rearing expert. Much of his
research was directed at distinguishing unlearned from
learned behavior. Observations of hundreds of babies revealed that sneezing, hiccoughing, crying, erection of
penis, voiding of urine, defecation, smiling, certain eye
movements and motor reactions, feeding responses, grasping, and blinking were unlearned, but that they began to
become conditioned a few hours after birth. Crawling,
swimming, and handedness appeared to be learned. Watson also traced the beginnings of language to unlearned
vocal sounds, and found that three forms of emotional
(“visceral”) response can be elicited at birth by three sets
of stimuli: fear (by loss of support and loud sounds; Watson did not notice that his conditioning fear of fire
through burning alone contradicted his view), rage (by
hampering of bodily movement), and love (by stroking of
the skin, tickling, gentle rocking, patting). Just as there
was no innate fear of darkness, there was no instinctive
love of the child for the mother; all “visceral habits” were
shaped by conditioning. In one of the most controversial
experiments of all psychology, Watson conditioned
eleven-month-old “little Albert” to fear furry objects; this
case was for him proof that complex behavior develops by
conditioning out of simple unlearned responses.
Watson considered the ultimate aim of psychology
to be the adjustment of individual needs to the needs of
society. He encouraged parents to approach childrearing

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

David Wechsler
1896-1981
American experimental and clinical psychologist
who developed new types of intelligence tests.

John B. Watson (The Library of Congress. Reproduced with
permission.)

as a professional application of behaviorism. Psychological Care of Infant and Child (1928) is dedicated “to the
first mother who brings up a happy child.” Such a child
would be an autonomous, fearless, self-reliant, adaptable, problem-solving being, who does not cry unless
physically hurt, is absorbed in work and play, and has no
great attachments to any place or person. Watson warned
against the dangers of “too much mother love,” and advocated strict routines and a tight control over the child’s
environment and behavior. His disapproval of thumbsucking, masturbation, and homosexuality was not
moral, but practical, and he encouraged parents to be
honest about sex. He agreed with psychoanalysts on the
importance of sexuality. Partly because of the premature
end to Watson’s university career, his views did not have
a decisive influence on academic child psychology.
They contributed, however, to professionalizing childrearing, and bolstered contemporary arguments, by Fred
and John Dewey for example, on the determining lifelong effects of early development.
Further Reading
Buckley, K.W. Mechanical Man. John Broadus Watson and the
Beginnings of Behaviorism. New York: Guilford Press,
1989.

David Wechsler developed the first standardized
adult intelligence test, the Bellevue-Wechsler Scale, in
1939. Likewise, the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children, published in 1949 and revised in 1974, was considered to be the best test available. The concept that intelligence involves the abilities necessary to succeed in life
was one of Wechsler’s major contributions to psychology. He promoted the idea that intelligence includes personality traits and emotional states, as well as mental
abilities, and that all of these should be measured to assess intelligent behavior in one’s environment. Wechsler
also promoted the idea that educational, cultural, and socioeconomic factors must be considered when evaluating
intelligence. The author of more than 60 books and articles, Wechsler served as president of the American Psychopathology Association in 1959-60 and earned the
Distinguished Professional Contribution Award of the
American Psychological Association in 1973.
Born in Lespedi, Romania, in 1896, Wechsler was
the youngest of seven children of Moses S. Wechsler, a
Hebrew scholar, and Leah W. Pascal, a shopkeeper. The
family moved to New York City in 1902, and Wechsler
graduated from the City College of New York in 1916. He
earned his master’s degree in experimental psychopathology the following year, working with Robert S. Woodworth at Columbia University. His dissertation was published in 1917.

Recognizes the limitations of intelligence
testing
During the First World War, Wechsler worked at
Camp Yaphank on Long Island under E. G. Boring, scoring intelligence tests for the army as a civilian volunteer.
He continued working with intelligence testing while
serving with the army’s Psychological Division of the
Sanitary Corps at Fort Logan, Texas. These experiences
convinced Wechsler of the limitations of available intelligence tests, particular for uneducated or foreign-born

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

663

David Wechsler

Cohen, D. Behaviorism. [1924, 1930], New York: W.W. Norton, 1970.
———. Psychological Care of Infant and Child. New York:
W.W. Norton, 1928.
———. J.B. Watson: The Founder of Behaviorism. London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1979.

Wechsler Intelligence Scales

adults. After serving in France, Wechsler became an army
student at the University of London in 1919, where he
studied with Karl Pearson and Charles Spearman, who
shared his interests in intelligence testing. Wechsler then
obtained a two-year fellowship to study in Paris with the
physiologist Louis Lapique and the experimental psychologist Henri Piéron. Wechsler’s research focused on the
psychogalvanic response, the changes in electrical conductivity of the skin that accompany emotional changes.
After spending the summer of 1922 working at the
Psychopathic Hospital in Boston, Wechsler returned to
New York City, as a psychologist with the Bureau of
Child Guidance. There, for the next two years, he administered psychological tests. Concurrently, he completed
his Ph.D. dissertation at Columbia under Woodworth.
This work, “The Measurement of Emotional Reactions:
Researches on the Psychogalvanic Reflex,” was published in Archives of Psychology in 1925.
During the next seven years, Wechsler had a private
clinical practice, as well as working as acting secretary
of the Psychological Corporation, which later published
his intelligence tests. He also was a psychologist at the
Brooklyn Jewish Social Service Bureau. Wechsler continued to look for more broadly based measurements of
intelligence. His 1930 article in The Scientific Monthly
was expanded into his 1935 book, The Range of Human
Capacities. In this work, Wechsler argued that psychologists had overestimated the range of variations among individuals and that human beings were actually surprisingly similar. He further argued that abilities peaked at a
certain age and then began to decline. Wechsler began
devising a variety of different types of tests. In 1926, he
developed “Tests for Taxi Cab Drivers” for the Yellow
Cab Company of Pittsburgh.

Develops new ways to measure intelligence
In 1932, Wechsler began his long career as chief
psychologist at the Bellevue Psychiatric Hospital in New
York and, the following year, joined the faculty of the
New York University College of Medicine. Although he
engaged in a variety of research projects, his major focus
continued to be intelligence. At Bellevue, Wechsler tested both children and adults from a wide variety of backgrounds and with numerous problems. Again, he found
that traditional testing methods were not suitable. In particular, he concluded that the commonly used Binet tests
of intelligence were too narrow in scope and were inappropriate for adults. In addition to his well-known tests
for adults and children, Wechsler developed the Army
Wechsler (1942), the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale
in 1955 which he revised in 1981, and the Wechsler
Preschool and Primary Scale of Intelligence in 1967.
664

Wechsler’s tests measured abilities in performing tasks
as well as mental abilities. He also introduced the deviation quotient, a new calculation that compared individuals with their peer group, rather than calculating a “mental age” as in the Binet tests. The deviation quotient corrected for abilities that changed with age and made it
easier to detect abnormalities. In 1939, Wechsler published The Measurement of Adult Intelligence.
Wechsler never lost sight of the limitations of his intelligence tests. Although his tests often are interpreted
as a clear measure of intelligence, Wechsler himself believed that they were useful only in conjunction with
other clinical measurements. To Wechsler, assessments
were far superior to mere testing.
Wechsler’s first wife, Florence Felske, died in an automobile accident three weeks after their marriage in
1934. In 1939, he married Ruth A. Halpern and the couple had two children. During World War II, Wechsler
acted as special consultant to the secretary of war and,
beginning in 1948, he was consultant to the Veterans Administration. In 1947, Wechsler participated in a mission
to Cyprus to form a mental health program for Holocaust survivors. A founder of Hebrew University in
Jerusalem, he was Beber Visiting Professor of Clinical
Psychology there in 1967, the year he retired from his
posts at Bellevue and New York University. Wechsler
was the recipient of numerous awards, including a special award from the American Association on Mental
Deficiency and an honorary doctorate from Hebrew University. Wechsler died in New York City in 1981.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Carson, John. “Wechsler, David.” In American national biography, edited by John A. Garraty and Mark C. Carnes. Vol
22. New York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Wechsler, David. Selected papers of David Wechsler. With introductory material by Allen J. Edwards. New York: Academic Press, 1974.

Wechsler Intelligence Scales
A widely used series of intelligence tests developed
by clinical psychologist David Wechsler.

The Wechsler Intelligence Scales are divided into
two sections: verbal and nonverbal (or “performance”),
with separate scores for each. Verbal intelligence, the
component most often associated with academic success,
implies the ability to think in abstract terms using either

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

The Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children
(WISC), now in its second revision (WISC-III, 1991), is
designed for children and adolescents ages six to sixteen.
The WISC differs from the WIPPSI in the following notable ways: geometric designs are replaced by assembly
of three-dimensional objects; children arrange groups of
pictures to tell simple stories; they are asked to remember and repeat lists of digits; a coding exercise is performed in place of the animal house; and mazes are a
subtest. For all of the Wechsler scales (which also include the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, or WAIS),
separate verbal and performance scores, as well as a total
score, are computed. These are then converted using a
scale divided into categories (such as average and superior), and the final score is generally given as one of these
categories rather than as a number or percentile ranking.
See also Intelligence Quotient, I.Q. test; StanfordBinet Intelligence Scales.

Carl Wernicke

A test subject performs the block test portion of the
Wechsler intelligence scales. (Will & Deni McIntyre. Photo
Researchers, Inc. Reproduced with permission.)

words or mathematical symbols. Performance intelligence suggests the ability to perceive relationships and
fit separate parts together logically into a whole. The inclusion of the performance section in the Wechsler scales
is especially helpful in assessing the cognitive ability of
children with speech and language disorders or whose
first language is not English. The test can be of particular
value to school psychologists screening for specific
learning disabilities because of the number of specific
subtests that make up each section.
The Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scales of Intelligence (WPPSI) have traditionally been geared toward children ages four to six, although the 1989 version
of the test (WPPSI-III, 1989) extends the age range
down to three years and upward to seven years, three
months. The Verbal section covers the following areas:
general information (food, money, the body, etc.); vocabulary (definitions of increasing difficulty); comprehension (responses to questions); arithmetic (adding, sub-

1848-1905
German neuroanatomist, pathologist, and psychiatrist who made fundamental discoveries about
brain function.

Carl Wernicke was an influential member of the
nineteenth-century German school of neuropsychiatry,
which viewed all mental illnesses as resulting from defects in brain physiology. A practicing clinical neuropsychiatrist, Wernicke also made major discoveries in
brain anatomy and pathology. He believed that abnormalities could be localized to specific regions of the
cerebral cortex and thus could be used to determine the
functions of these regions. Wernicke was one of the first
to conceive of brain function as dependent on neural
pathways that connected different regions of the brain,
with each region contributing a relatively simple sensory-motor activity. At the time, most scientists conceived
of the brain as functioning as a single organ. Wernicke
also helped demonstrate dominance by either the right or
left hemispheres of the cerebrum.
Wernicke was born in 1848 in the German town of
Tarnowitz in Upper Silesia, in what is now Tarnowskie

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

665

Carl Wernicke

tracting, counting); sentences (repeating progressively
longer sentences); and similarities (responding to questions such as “How are a pen and pencil alike?”). The
Performance section includes picture completion; copying geometric designs; using blocks to reproduce designs; working through a maze; and building an “animal
house” from a model.

Max Wertheimer

Gory, Poland. He earned his medical degree at the University of Breslau in 1870 and stayed on to work with
Heinrich Neumann. Wernicke also spent six months
studying with Theodor Meynert in Vienna. He earned his
psychiatry qualification in 1875 and moved to Berlin,
where he spent three years at the Charité Hospital as assistant to Karl Westphal, before starting a private practice in Berlin. With his mentors, Meynert and Westphal,
Wernicke continued the neuropsychiatric tradition begun
by Wilhelm Griesinger.

Describes Wernicke’s aphasia
In 1873, Wernicke studied a patient who had suffered a stroke. Although the man was able to speak and
his hearing was unimpaired, he could barely understand
what was said to him. Nor could he understand written
words. After he died, Wernicke found a lesion in the rear
parietal/temporal region of the patient’s left brain hemisphere. Wernicke concluded that this region, which is
close to the auditory region of the brain, was involved in
speech comprehension. Wernicke named the syndrome
sensory aphasia, although now it is usually called Wernicke’s aphasia. The affected region of the brain is
known as Wernicke’s area. The syndrome is sometimes
called fluent aphasia since the victim is capable of
speech; however words may be misused and the speech
may be disordered or even without content. For this reason, scientists now believe that Wernicke’s area may be
involved in semantic processing, and it is sometimes
called the receptive language area.
Wernicke published The Aphasic Symptom Complex
in 1874 when he was 26. In this work, he developed
many of his ideas about brain localization, and he related
different types of aphasia to specific damaged regions of
the brain. In contrast to Wernicke’s aphasia, motor aphasia involves damage to the part of the brain known as
Broca’s area. With this syndrome, a patient understands
speech, but cannot speak himself. Wernicke postulated
that Broca’s area and Wernicke’s area were connected,
and he predicted that damage to this connection would
cause conduction aphasia, a syndrome wherein a patient
could both speak and understand language, but would
misuse words and could not repeat words. Wernicke’s
prediction turned out to be correct. Two of Wernicke’s
early aphasia papers were published in English in 1994.

Describes Wernicke’s encephalopathy
The three volumes of Wernicke’s comprehensive
work, Textbook of Brain Disorders, appeared between
1881 and 1883. In this work, based on careful case studies, Wernicke attempted to relate all known neurological
diseases to specific regions of the brain. The volumes in666

cluded many of Wernicke’s original observations on brain
anatomy, pathology, and clinical manifestations. Based
on his observations, he predicted the symptoms that
would result from blockage of the posterior inferior cerebellar artery. Again, his hypothesis was later confirmed.
In the second volume, Wernicke described for the first
time a syndrome resulting from the ingestion of sulfuric
acid, which caused specific mental and motor abnormalities and paralysis of muscles in the eyes. He called this
syndrome acute hemorrhagic superior polioencephalitis.
It now is called Wernicke’s encephalopathy and is known
to be caused by a nutritional thiamine deficiency.
In 1885, Wernicke became an associate professor of
neurology and psychiatry at the University of Breslau.
Five years later, he was awarded the department chair.
Wernicke’s clinical studies were published as Grundriss
der Psychiatrie in klinischen Vorlesungen in 1894, with a
second edition in 1906, and as Krankenvorstellungen aus
der psychiatrischen Klinik in Breslau, in the years 18991900. Between 1897 and 1903, Wernicke published the
three-part Atlas des Gehirns on neuroanatomy and
pathology. His last work on aphasia appeared in 1903
and was translated into English in 1908.
Wernicke moved to the University of Halle in 1904
as a full professor. The following year, he died in Dörrberg im Geratal, Germany, of injuries suffered in a bicycling accident. Wernicke’s research laid the foundation
for the Wernicke-Geschwind model of language, which
predicted the neural pathways involved in simple language tasks, such as reading a word aloud.
Margaret Alic
Further Reading
Bynum, William F. “Wernicke, Carl.” In Dictionary of Scientific Biography, edited by Charles Coulston Gillispie. Vol.
14. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1970.
Lanczik, M., and G. Keil. “Carl Wernicke’s Localization Theory and its Significance for the Development of Scientific
Psychiatry.” History of Psychiatry 2 (1991): 171-180.

Max Wertheimer
1880-1943
German psychologist who was the originator of
Gestalt psychology, which had a profound influence on the whole science of psychology.

Max Wertheimer was born in Prague on April 15,
1880. At the University in Prague he first studied law
and then philosophy; he continued his studies in Berlin

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

For Wertheimer, neither line of criticism went to the
core of the problem. The difficulties of the older psychology went far beyond its failure to explain special
laboratory findings. Everything that was vital, meaningful, and essential seemed to be lost in the traditional approach. The trouble, he held, was not in the scientific
method itself but rather in an assumption generally
made about that method—that it must be atomistic.
But science need not only be analytical in this sense.
The viewing of complex wholes as “and-sums,” to be reduced to accidentally and arbitrarily associated elements,
Wertheimer described as an approach “from below,”
whereas many situations need to be approached “from
above.” In these cases, what happens in the whole cannot
be understood from a knowledge of its components considered piecemeal; rather the behavior of the parts themselves depends on their place in the structured whole, in
the context in which they exist.

Max Wertheimer (Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with
permission.)

and then in Würzburg, where he received his doctorate in
1904. During the following years, his work included research on the psychology of testimony, deriving no
doubt from his early interest in law and his abiding interest in the nature of truth; he also carried on research in
music, another lifelong interest.
In 1910, Wertheimer performed his now famous experiments on apparent movement, that movement which
we see when, under certain conditions, two stationary
objects are presented in succession at different places (a
phenomenon familiar in moving pictures). This was the
beginning of Gestalt psychology—a major revolution in
psychological thinking.
The phenomena which Wertheimer was investigating could not be explained by the then-prevailing psychology. Psychology was, in 1910, characteristically analytical: in naive imitation of the natural sciences, it attempted to reduce every complex phenomenon to simpler ones, the elements which were supposed to make up
the whole.
But it was already clear that this analytical procedure could not account for many well-known psychological facts. Some advocates of the older psychology tried
to patch it up by adding assumptions to take care of trou-

These are precisely the situations which are most
important for psychology, those in which we find meaning, value, order. Thus, apparent movement cannot be
understood if one knows only the “stills” by which it is
produced; nor can the form of a circle, the peacefulness
of a landscape, the sternness of a command, the inevitability of a conclusion be understood from a knowledge of independent elements. Here, whole properties
are primary, and the characteristics of parts are derived
from the dynamics of their wholes.
Wertheimer became a lecturer in Frankfurt in 1912.
Later he went to Berlin and in 1929 returned to Frankfurt
as professor. All this time he was developing his ideas
and influencing students who themselves became distinguished psychologists. Although he preferred the spoken
to the written word as a vehicle for communication, he
wrote some notable articles applying the new approach
“from above” to the organization of the perceptual field
and to the nature of thinking.
Just before the German elections in 1933, Wertheimer
heard a speech by Hitler over a neighbor’s radio. He decided that he did not want his family to live in a country
where such a man could run, with likelihood of success,
for the highest office in the land; and the next day the family moved to Marienbad, Czechoslovakia. Soon
Wertheimer realized that Hitler was not a passing phenomenon, and he accepted an invitation from the New
School for Social Research in New York City to join its
University in Exile (later the Graduate Faculty of Political
and Social Science). He resumed his studies of thinking,

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

667

Max Wertheimer

blesome findings, while leaving the old framework intact. Other scholars, seeing the inadequacy of the customary approach, denied that the problems of psychology could be treated scientifically.

Withdrawal behavior

completing his major work, Productive Thinking, a highly
original and penetrating examination of the processes that
occur in thinking at its best. In a series of articles, he
showed the application of Gestalt thinking to problems of
truth, ethics, freedom, and democracy. Unfortunately, he
did not live to write his projected Gestalt logic.
See also Gestalt principles of organization
Further Reading
Köhler, Wolfgang. The task of Gestalt psychology. 1969.

Withdrawal behavior
Tendency to avoid either unfamiliar persons, locations, or situations.

Withdrawal behavior is characterized by the tendency to avoid the unfamiliar, either people, places, or situations. Though withdrawal, or avoidance, can be the result
of a temperamental tendency toward inhibition to unfamiliar events, anxiety over the anticipation of a critical
evaluation, or a conditioned avoidant response, often
called a phobia, can produce withdrawal. These are
three different mechanisms, each of which can mediate
withdrawal behavior.
Withdrawal behavior is typically seen in children.
The withdrawal or avoidance that is seen in the
preschool years is, most of the time, due to a temperamental bias that makes some children uncertain over unfamiliar events. During later childhood, withdrawal or
avoidance occurs due to very specific events, like lightening, animals, insects, or foods. At this point, withdrawal is usually not the result of a temperamental bias, but
more often is due to conditioning experiences in which
the child had a painful or frightening experience in association with the event he avoids.
A small group of children who appear withdrawn
may have serious mental illness, including schizophrenia or autism. However, these are relatively rare illnesses
and therefore the average child who appears withdrawn
will probably not be afflicted with these problems.
Jerome Kagan

Joseph Wolpe
1915-1997
South African-born American psychiatrist who
made significant contributions to behavior therapy.
668

Joseph Wolpe’s groundbreaking work as a behaviorist
was grounded in his belief that behavior therapy was as
much an applied science as any other aspect of medicine.
He is probably best known for his work in the areas of desensitization and assertiveness training, both of which
have become important elements of behavioral therapy.
He was born on April 20, 1915 in Johannesburg,
South Africa, to Michael Salmon and Sarah Millner
Wolpe. He grew up in South Africa and attended college
there, obtaining his M.D. from the University of Witwatersrand. When the Second World War began, he joined
the South African army as a medical officer. He worked
in a military psychiatric hospital, and witnessed soldiers
who were suffering from what would today be called
post-traumatic stress syndrome. At the time, it was
known as “war neurosis,” and Wolpe and his colleagues
first tried to treat the problem with drug therapy. The
results were marginally helpful, however, and Wolpe decided to work on finding more effective means for dealing with the problem.
He came up with the concept now known as desensitization. Reasoning that much of our behavior, both
good and bad, is learned, there was no reason why it
could not be unlearned. Wolpe’s initial experiments were
with cats. These animals were given mild electric shocks
accompanied by specific sounds and visual stimuli. Once
the cats knew to equate the unpleasant shock with these
images or sounds, the images and sounds created a feeling of fear. By gradually exposing the cats to these same
sights and sounds—with food being given instead of
shocks—the cats gradually “unlearned” their fear.
Those who suffer phobias—whether rational or unfounded—know that exposure to the object of fear can
be crippling. Modern desensitization techniques include
teaching patients relaxation techniques and gradually rehearsing stressful situations, until the patient is finally
able to handle the fear-inducing objects.
Sometimes, as Wolpe found out, the problem may
not be fear of the object per se, but a negative association
coming from another source. In one instance, Wolpe
tried to desensitize a woman to an inordinate fear of insects. The usual methods did not work; then Wolpe
found out that the woman’s husband, with whom she had
not been getting along, was nicknamed for an insect. The
key then was to work on the marital problems. Once
these had been dealt with, the woman’s phobia gradually disappeared.
Wolpe’s research also led to assertiveness training.
As with desensitization, it requires a gradual move into
new behaviors. People who have trouble asserting themselves are very much like phobics in that they fear confrontation and conflict, anger in others, and rejection.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Perhaps Wolpe’s most important contribution to
psychiatry was that he managed to combine two seemingly disparate disciplines. Many psychologists and psychiatrists felt that methods based in applied science
lacked the humanistic touch they felt was so important
when dealing with people. What Wolpe did was show
that effective, compassionate therapy could be combined
with empirical methods in a way that used both to their
best advantage. Among his writings, his books
Pyschotheraphy by Reciprocal Inhibition (1958) and The
Practice of Behavior Therapy (1969) are considered
classics in behavior therapy studies.
After the war, Wolpe worked at the University of
Witwatersrand; later, he moved to the U.S., where he
initially taught at the University of Virginia. In 1965, he
became a professor of psychiatry at Temple University
Medical School in Philadelphia, a post that he held until
1988. During this time, he also served as director of the
behavior therapy unit at the nearby Eastern Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute. He served as the second president of the Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy, from which he received a lifetime achievement award.
Wolpe retired in 1988 and moved to California.
Once he had settled in California, however, his retirement did not last long. He began lecturing at Pepperdine
University and continued until a month before his death.
He was married twice. His first wife, whom he married
in 1948, was Stella Ettman. She died in 1990, and he
married Eva Gyarmati in 1996. He had two children and
three stepchildren. Lung cancer claimed Wolpe’s life on
December 4, 1998.

tion is stored in memory. Studies have demonstrated
that word associations are almost always based on a
word’s meaning, as opposed to its physical properties.
For example, a typical response to the word KNIFE
might be FORK or perhaps SPOON, but not WIFE or
LIFE. Over the years, psychologists have collected word
association norms that describe the relative frequencies
with which various responses are given to different
words. These frequencies are then used as a measure of
the associative strength between the words. If 90% of a
large sample of people give the word DOCTOR as a response to the word NURSE, this percentage (90) is used
as an index of the associative connection between DOCTOR and NURSE. Another way of determining the
strength of an association is to measure how much time
it takes to produce a response in a word association test.
High frequency associates are also the ones with the
fastest reaction times.
By comparing children’s word associations to those
of adults, we can learn something about how word meanings are acquired. Five year-olds are likely to respond to
the word LONG with a response like GRASS—indicating that words are organized in their memory according
to real world situations and personal experience. By age
10, the most common response is SHORT, thereby revealing a growing awareness of linguistic relations and
grammatical categories.
See also Free association
Timothy E. Moore

Wilhelm Max Wundt

George A. Milite

1832-1920
German psychologist and philosopher who founded experimental psychology.

Word association test
A procedure for investigating how word meanings
are stored in memory.

In a word association test, the researcher presents a
series of words to individual respondents. For each word,
participants are instructed to respond with the first word
(i.e., associate) that comes to mind. Freud believed that
such responses provided clues to peoples’ personalities
(free association). Cognitive psychologists, however,
use this procedure to investigate how semantic informa-

Wilhelm Wundt was born on August 16, 1832, in
Baden, in a suburb of Mannheim called Neckarau. As a
child, he was tutored by Friedrich Müller. Wundt attended the Gymnasium at Bruschel and at Heidelberg, the
University of Tübingen for a year, then Heidelberg for
more than three years, receiving a medical degree in
1856. He remained at Heidelberg as a lecturer in physiology from 1857 to 1864, then was appointed assistant
professor in physiology. The great physiologist, physicist, and physiological psychologist Hermann von
Helmholtz came there in 1858, and Wundt was his assistant for a period of time.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

669

Wilhelm Max Wundt

Assertiveness training gives them the framework to build
their confidence, relax in formerly stressful situations,
and conquer their fear.

Wilhelm Max Wundt

G. Stanley Hall, Wundt’s first American student, arrived,
followed by many other Americans. From this first laboratory for experimental psychology, a steady stream of
psychologists returned to their own countries to teach
and to continue their researches. Some founded psychological laboratories of their own.
In 1881, Wundt founded Philosophische Studien as
a vehicle for the new experimental psychology, especially as a publication organ for the products of his psychological laboratory. The contents of Philosophische Studien (changed to Psychologische Studien in 1903) reveal
that the experiments fell mainly into four categories:
sensation and perception; reaction time; time perception and association; and attention, memory, feeling,
and association. Optical phenomena led with 46 articles;
audition was second in importance. Sight and hearing,
which Helmholtz had already carefully studied, were the
main themes of Wundt’s laboratory. Some of the contributions to the Studien were by Wundt himself.
Helmholtz is reported to have said of some of Wundt’s
experiments that they were schlampig (sloppy). Comparing Wundt to Helmholtz, who was a careful experimentalist and productive researcher, one must conclude that
Wundt’s most important contributions were as a systematizer, organizer, and encyclopedist. William James
considered Wundt “only a rather ordinary man who has
worked up certain things uncommonly well.”

Wilhelm Wundt (Corbis-Bettmann. Reproduced with
permission.)

During the period from 1857 to 1874, Wundt
evolved from a physiologist to a psychologist. In these
years he also wrote Grundzüge der physiologischen psychologie (Principles of Physiological Psychology). The
two-volume work, published in 1873-1874, stressed the
relations between psychology and physiology, and it
showed how the methods of natural science could be
used in psychology. Six revised editions of this work
were published, the last completed in 1911.
As a psychologist, Wundt used the method of investigating conscious processes in their own context by “experiment” and introspection. This technique has been referred to as content psychology, reflecting Wundt’s belief that psychology should concern itself with the immediate content of experience unmodified by abstraction or
reflection.
In 1874, Wundt left Heidelberg for the chair of inductive philosophy at Zurich, staying there only a year.
He accepted the chair of philosophy at the University of
Leipzig, and in 1879 he founded the first psychological
laboratory in the world. To Leipzig, men came from all
over the world to study in Wundt’s laboratory. In 1879,

670

Wundt’s Grundriss der Psychologie (1896; Outline
of Psychology) was a less detailed treatment than his
Principles, but it contained the new theory of feeling. A
popular presentation of his system of psychology was
Einführung in die Psychologie (1911; Introduction to
Psychology). His monumental Völkerpsychologie (1912;
Folk Psychology), a natural history of man, attempted to
understand man’s higher thought processes by studying
language, art, mythology, religion, custom, and law. Besides his psychological works he wrote three philosophical texts: Logic (1880-1883), Ethics (1886), and System
of Philosophy (1889). Wundt died near Leipzig on August 31, 1920.
Further Reading
Brett, George Sidney. Brett’s history of psychology. R. S. Peters, ed. 1953. 2nd rev. ed. 1965.
Hall, G. Stanley. Founders of modern psychology. 1912.
Flugel, J.C. A hundred years of psychology. 1933. rev. 1965.
Boring, Edwin G. A history of experimental psychology. 1929.
2nd ed. 1950.
Wolman, Benjamin B. Historical roots of contemporary psychology. 1968.
Wundt studies: a centennial collection. Toronto: C.J. Hogrefe,
1980.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Y
Robert Yerkes
1876-1956
American psychologist who made important contributions to the fields of comparative animal psychology, particularly in the areas of animal intelligence and behavior.

Robert Yerkes was born in Pennsylvania, and was educated at Harvard University, where he received his doctorate in psychology in 1902. He served as professor of
psychology at Harvard, the University of Minnesota, and
Yale University, and as a member of the National Research Council. In 1919, Yerkes founded the Yale Laboratories of Primate Biology and served as its director from
1929 to 1941, when the lab was moved to Orange Park,
Florida. A year later, it was renamed the Yerkes Laboratories of Primate Biology. A pioneer in the field of comparative psychology, Yerkes studied the intelligence and behavior of many forms of animal life, from jellyfish to humans, but he focused most of his attention on primates.
Among his findings were the discovery that chimpanzees
imitate both each other and human beings, and the observation that orangutans can pile boxes on top of one another to reach food after seeing this demonstrated, thus transferring this experience to other learning problems.
Yerkes also worked on the Yerkes-Dodson Law,
which states that for every task there is an optimum level
of motivation, and that motivation that is too strong can
actually interfere with the ability to perform a difficult
task. Yerkes also pioneered the use of monochromatic
light to study color vision in animals. In 1911, he developed the first multiple-choice test for animals, designed
to test abstraction abilities. A row of nine or fewer boxes
were shown to the animal, which had to determine which
of the open boxes had food in it and then remember that
box in subsequent rounds of testing.
Turning his attention to human testing, Yerkes revised the Stanford-Binet Intelligence scales in 1915 to
create a widely used point scale for the measurement of

Robert Mearns Yerkes (The Library of Congress. Reproduced
with permission.)

human mental ability. He was also a principal figure in
the development of human multiple choice testing. During World War I, Yerkes directed a team of 40 psychologists charged with assessing the abilities of army recruits
for training, assignment, and discharge purposes. Together they developed the Army Alpha test, a written intelligence test, and Army Beta, a pictorial test for the 40
percent of draftees who were functionally illiterate. By
the end of the war, these tests had been used to classify
some 1.75 million men. As a result of taking these tests,
some 8,000 had been discharged as unfit, while the
Alpha test played a role in the selection of two thirds of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

671

Robert Yerkes

the 200,000 men who served as commissioned officers
during the war.
In addition to its impact on the military, the wartime
testing developed by Yerkes and his colleagues had a farreaching effect on civilian life after the war. Unlike the
Stanford Binet scale, which had to be individually administered by a tester, the Alpha and Beta tests were developed to be administered to groups, making them
faster, simpler, and far less expensive to use. After the
war, this breakthrough in mental measurement led to a
dramatic expansion in intelligence testing. Yerkes and

672

several colleagues devised one of several pencil-andpaper tests that were marketed to school administrators
throughout the country. The National Research Council,
the test’s sponsor, described it as deriving from “the application of the army testing methods to school needs.”
By 1930, it had been administered to seven million
schoolchildren. (The Scholastic Aptitude Test was developed by one of Yerkes’ colleagues during this same period.) Yerkes’ books include: Introduction to Psychology
(1911), The Mental Life of Monkeys and Apes (1916),
The Great Apes (1929) (coauthored with Ada Yerkes),
and Chimpanzees: A Laboratory Colony (1943).

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Z
Edward F. Zigler
1930Developmental psychologist who has focused on
maximizing the potential of children from underprivileged backgrounds, and who has significantly
contributed to national programs for children such
as the Head Start program.

Edward Frank Zigler was born in 1930 to Louis
Zigler and Gertrude (Gleitman) Zigler of Kansas, Missouri. His parents and two older sisters immigrated to the
United States from Poland. After attending a vocational
high school in Kansas City, Zigler earned his B.S. at the
University of Missouri, Kansas City. He went on to obtain his Ph.D. in developmental psychology from the
University of Texas at Austin in 1958. He then taught for
a year at the University of Missouri at Columbia before
going to Yale in 1959, where he became director of the
Yale University department of child development in
1961. Zigler married Bernice Gorelick in 1955 and has
one son, Scott.
In 1970, Zigler was appointed by President Nixon to
the post of first director of the office of Child Development, which has since been renamed the Administration
of Children, Youth and Families. He was also appointed
as chief of the U.S. Children’s Bureau. While he was the
director of the Office of Child Development in Washington, Zigler administered the nation’s Head Start Program, which was established by the United States Congress in 1965, and funded by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services as part of the “war on poverty” legislation of 1964. Its purpose is to provide educational, health, and social services for pregnant mothers,
children from birth to age five, and their families
through the channels of preschool education, medical
treatment, and developmental screenings. The Head Start
theory is that all of a child’s early needs must be met in
order for them to reach their full potential later on. Theoretically, the program enables underprivileged children,

or those with severe learning disabilities, to develop and
be better prepared to face life later on.
Zigler is frequently called as an expert witness before congressional committees and to comment on social
policy issues that concern children and families in the
United States. He has also chaired numerous conferences
concerned with children. Notably, he was appointed as
Honorary Commissioner for the National Commission
on the Year of the Child in 1979.
Zigler served on the President’s Committee on
Mental Retardation and was requested by president
Ford to chair the Vietnamese Children’s Resettlement
Advisory Group. In 1980, at President Carter’s request,
he chaired the fifteenth anniversary Head Start Committee. This committee was charged with planning future
policy for this government-run intervention program. As
director of the Office of Child Development, Zigler is
also credited with conceptualizing and initiating other
programs such as Health Start, Home Start, Education
for Parenthood, the Child Development Associate Program and the Child and Family Resource Program.
In 1993, Zigler was appointed as head of a national
committee of distinguished Americans who were
charged with looking into the possibilities for legislation
to make infant care leave a reality in the United States.
The work of this committee culminated in the Family
and Medical Leave act of 1993.
Zigler has written 26 books and over five hundred
articles about his research and theories. In addition, he is
a member of the editorial boards of ten professional journals, Associate Editor of Children and Youth Services
Review, and consulting editor of the Merril-Palmer
Quarterly. In August 1999, Zigler published Personality
Development in Individuals with Mental Retardation,
consolidating forty years of his research on the subject.
Zigler has been awarded numerous honors, among
them the Harold W. McGraw, Jr., Prize in Education,
awards from the Joseph P. Kennedy, Jr., Foundation, the
American Psychological Association, the American

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

673

Edward F. Zigler

Academy of Pediatrics, the National Association for Retarded Citizens, the American Association on Mental Deficiency, the National Academy of Sciences, the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, the
National Head Start Association, and the American Orthopsychiatric Association.

Social Policy. His laboratory is notable for the range of
basic and applied studies of child development and family functioning studies in which it is engaged.

Currently Sterling Professor of Psychology at Yale,
Zigler is head of the Yale Child Study Facility and also
director of the Bush Center in Child Development and

Further Reading

674

See also Child development
Patricia Skinner
Sheehy, et al, eds. Biographical dictionary of psychology. New
York: Routledge, 1997.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

GLOSSARY

A
Absolute threshold. The minimal amount of energy
necessary to stimulate the sensory receptors.

Antisocial behavior. A pattern of behavior that is
verbally or physically harmful to other people, animals,
or property, including behavior that severely violates social expectations.

Action potential. A momentary electrical event occurring through the membrane of a nerve cell fiber in response to a stimulus, forming a nerve impulse.

Antisocial personality disorder. A behavior disorder characterized by disregard for social norms and laws,
manipulation, impulsivity, recklessness, and lack of remorse; also known as sociopathy or psychopathy.

Addiction/addictive personality. A wide spectrum
of complex behaviors that arises from dependence on
drugs or participation in some other activity.

Anxiety/anxiety disorders. An unpleasant emotional state characterized by apprehension, worry, and fear.

Adjustment disorders. The development of significant emotional or behavioral symptoms in response to an
identifiable event that precipitated psychological or social stress.
Alcoholic psychoses. Acute reactions to alcohol
characterized by alcohol idiosyncratic intoxication, alcohol withdrawal delirium, hallucinations, and irreversible
brain damage involving severe memory loss.
Alexia. Inability to read; a form of dyslexia.
Ambivalence. The concurrent existence of contrasting, opposing, or contradictory feelings, emotions, or attitudes regarding a person, object, or idea.
Ames room. Specially constructed space that
demonstrates aspects of visual perception.
Anal stage. The second stage in Sigmund Freud’s
theory of psychosexual development characterized by
concerns over elimination, usually taking place around
two years of age.

Apgar score. The sum of numerical results indicating a newborn infant’s overall medical condition.
Aphasia. A condition in which a person’s previous
capacity to understand or express language is impaired.
Archetype. Primordial images and symbols found
in the collective unconscious that are passed on from
generation to generation.
Arousal. An increase in the level of an individual’s
readiness for activity.
Associationism. The view that mental processes can
be explained in terms of the association of ideas.
Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
Disorder characterized by inattention, impulsivity, and
hyperactivity.
Attribution theory. A term used to describe how
people explain the causes of behavior, both their own
and those of others.

Anonymity. A condition in which the identity of an
individual is not known to others.

Authoritarian personality. A personality pattern
characterized by rigidity, dependence on authority, conformity to group values, and intolerance of ambiguity.

Anorexia. An eating disorder in which preoccupation with dieting and thinness leads to excessive and dangerous weight loss.

Autoeroticism. Commonly referred to as masturbation, self-stimulation of the genital organs with the intention of producing sexual arousal and orgasm.

Anoxia. Lack of oxygen in the blood supply; also
called oxygen starvation.

Autohypnosis. The ability to hypnotize oneself
without the aid of another person.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

675

Autonomic nervous system

Autonomic nervous system. The nervous system
responsible for regulating automatic bodily processes,
such as breathing and heart rate. It also involves the
processes of metabolism, or the storage and expenditure
of energy.
Aversive conditioning. Also referred to as aversion
therapy, a technique that links undesired behavior with
physical or psychological discomfort.
Avoidance learning. An individual’s response to
avoid an unpleasant or stressful situation; also known as
escape learning.
Avoidant personality. Personality disorder characterized by social withdrawal and fear of rejection.
Axon. One of two types of short, threadlike fibers
that extend from the cell body of a nerve cell, or neuron
(the other type are called dendrites), and which sends
electrochemical signals.

Bipolar disorder. A condition traditionally called
manic depression in which a person alternates between
the two emotional extremes of depression and mania.
Borderline personality. Mental illness characterized by erratic and impulsive self-destructive behavior
and an intense fear of abandonment.
Bowen theory. An approach to family therapy proposed by Murray Bowen in which family members are
taught to reestablish their “real” identities.
Brainstem. Connector between the brain and the
spinal cord.
Brief reactive psychosis. An uncommon acute
mental disorder precipitated by an event that causes intense psychological stress.
Broca’s aphasia. Type of aphasia characterized by
slow, labored, “telegraphic” speech with propositions
and articles missing.
Bulimia. Eating disorder marked by episodes of
binge eating followed by behaviors to control weight.
Bystander effect. The effect of the presence of others
on an individual’s perception of and response to a situation.

B
Battered child syndrome. A group of physical and
mental symptoms arising from long-term physical violence against a child.
Bayley Scales of Infant Development. A comprehensive developmental test for infants and toddlers from
two to 30 months of age.
Behavior modification. A treatment approach,
based on the principles of operant conditioning, that replaces undesirable behaviors with more desirable ones
through reinforcements.

C
Castration anxiety. The fear of losing one’s penis.
In Freudian terms, this fear causes the boy to abandon
his incestuous attachment to his mother and begin to
identify with his father.
Catharsis. The release of repressed psychic energy.
Cathexis. The investment of psychic energy in a person or object connected with the gratification of instincts.

Behavior therapy. A goal-oriented, therapeutic approach that treats disorders as maladaptive learned responses that can be replaced by healthier ones.

Central nervous system. The portion of the nervous system that lies within the brain and spinal cord; it
receives impulses from nerve cells throughout the body,
regulates bodily functions, and directs behavior.

Behaviorism. A theory of human development initiated by Edward Thorndike and developed by John Watson and B.F. Skinner, emphasizing the study of measurable and observable behavior.

Cerebellum. Located below the cerebrum and behind the brainstem, it controls subconscious activities,
such as balance and muscular coordination.

Bender-Gestalt test. Diagnostic assessment test to
identify learning disability, neurological disorders, and
developmental delay.
Bestiality. Sexual feelings or behaviors involving
animals; also referred to as zoophilia.
Binocular depth cues. Properties of the visual system that facilitate depth perception by the nature of messages that are sent to the brain.
676

Cerebral cortex. Cerebrum’s outer layer consisting
of nerve cell bodies.
Cerebral palsy. A permanent motor disability
caused by brain damage associated with birth.
Cerebrum. Divided into two hemispheres (left and
right), the part of the brain that interprets sensory impulses. The left side functions mainly in speech, logic,
writing, and arithmetic. The right side is linked with
imagination, art, symbols, and spatial relations.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Classical conditioning. The process of closely associating a neutral stimulus with one that evokes a reflexive response so that eventually the neutral stimulus
alone will evoke the same response.
Clinical psychology. The application of psychological principles to diagnosing and treating persons with
emotional and behavioral problems.
Codependence. A term used to describe a person
who is intimately involved with a person who is abusing
or addicted to alcohol or another substance.
Cognition. A general term for the higher mental
processes by which people acquire knowledge, solve
problems, and plan for the future.
Cognitive behavior therapy. A therapeutic approach based on the principle that maladaptive moods
and behavior can be changed by replacing distorted or
inappropriate ways of thinking with thought patterns that
are healthier and more realistic.
Cognitive dissonance. Inconsistency between attitude (or belief) and behavior.
Cognitive psychology. An approach to psychology
that focuses on the relationship between cognitive or
mental processes and behavior.
Cognitive restructuring. Process of replacing negative thoughts with alternative thoughts that are positive
and calming.
Collective unconscious. Consciousness that is
shared by all people regardless of generation or culture.

Conditioned stimulus. Stimulus that leads to a
learned response.
Conduct disorder. Childhood antisocial behavior
disorder characterized by aggressive and destructive actions that harm others or property.
Consciousness. Awareness of external stimuli and
of one’s own mental activity.
Convergent thinking. The ability to narrow the
number of possible solutions to a problem by applying
logic and knowledge.
Conversion reaction. A psychological disorder
characterized by physical symptoms for which no physiological cause can be found.
Correlational method. A technique used to measure the likelihood of two behaviors or events relating to
each other.
Counterconditioning. Weakening or eliminating an
undesired response by introducing and strengthening a
second response that is incompatible with it.
Covert conditioning. A method for changing behavior that involves the client using imagination to target
unwanted behavior.
Cross-cultural psychology. A subfield of psychology concerned with observing human behavior in contrasting cultures.
Cross-sectional study. Research that collects data
simultaneously from people of different ages.
Cybernetics. The study of artificial intelligence systems and their comparison to human brain functions.

Combat neurosis. Mental disturbances related to
the stress of military combat.
Comparative psychology. A subfield of experimental psychology that focuses on the study of animals for the
purpose of comparing the behavior of different species.
Compensation. A defense mechanism in which an
individual unconsciously develops or overdevelops one
area of personality as substitutive behavior to make up
for a deficiency or inferiority in another area.
Concept formation. Learning process by which
items are categorized and related to each other.
Concrete operational stage. Third stage of Jean Piaget’s theory of cognitive development. At this stage,
children begin to develop clearer methods of thinking, although they have difficulty conceiving abstract thought.
Conditioned response. Behavior that is learned in
response to a particular stimulus.

D
Deductive reasoning. Way of thinking that relates
ideas to one another in reaching conclusions.
Defense mechanisms. Unconscious strategies for
avoiding or reducing threatening feelings such as fear
and anxiety.
Delusion. Beliefs that are in stark contrast to reality,
often having to do with persecution or an exaggerated
sense of importance or glory.
Dementia. A gradual deterioration of mental functioning affecting all areas of cognition, including judgment, language, and memory.
Dendrites. Nerve cell fibers that receive signals
from other cells.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

677

Dendrites

Childhood amnesia. The common inability to recall childhood experiences during the first three to five
years of life.

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). An organic substance that encodes and carries genetic information and
is the fundamental element of heredity.

Divergent thinking. The ability to come up with
original and unique ideas and to envision multiple solutions to a problem.

Dependent personality disorder. Disorder characterized by a lack of self-confidence coupled with excessive dependence on others.

Double bind. Term used to describe situations in
which communication and behavior conflict (for example, using warm, comforting voice while administering
physical punishment to a child).

Dependent variable. Variable measured in an experiment or study; what the experimenter measures.
Depression. An emotional state or mood characterized by one or more of these symptoms: sad mood, low
energy, poor concentration, sleep or appetite changes,
feelings of worthlessness or hopelessness, and thoughts
of suicide.
Derealization. Type of dissociation in which a person perceives reality in a grossly distorted way.

Draw-a-person test. A test that measures nonverbal
intelligence or to screen for emotional or behavioral disorders.
Drive reduction theory. A popular theory of the
1940s and 1950s that attributed behavior to the desire to
reduce tension produced by primary (biological) or secondary (acquired) drives.
Dyslexia. A reading disability that is not caused by
an identifiable physical problem.

Desensitization. Behavioral modification technique
in which undesired behavior, such as anxiety, is paired
with another response that is incompatible with it, such
as relaxation.
Determinism. A scientific perspective that specifies
that events occur in completely predictable ways as a result of natural and physical laws.

E
Echolalia. Repetition of another person’s words or
phrases.

Developmental delay. Any delay in a person’s
physical, cognitive, behavioral, emotional, or social development, due to any number of reasons.

Ectomorph. A body type proposed by William
Sheldon, who characterized ectomorphs as thin and intellectual or artistic.

Developmental psychology. The study of the ways
in which people develop physically, emotionally, intellectually, and socially over the course of their lives.

Effector. Peripheral tissue at the outer end of an efferent neural path (one leading away from the central
nervous system).

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV). A reference work developed by the
American Psychiatric Association and designed to provide guidelines for the diagnosis and classification of
mental disorders.

Ego. In psychoanalytic theory, the part of human
personality that combines innate biological impulses (id)
or drives with reality to produce appropriate behavior.

Diencephalon. Located above the brainstem, the
site of the thalamus and hypothalamus.
Differential psychology. The area of psychology
concerned with measuring and comparing differences in
individual and group behavior.
Displacement. A defense mechanism in which an
unacceptable impulse, such as aggression, is redirected
to something more acceptable, such as participating in a
boxing match.
Dissociative identity disorder. A disorder in which
a person’s identity dissociates, or fragments, creating additional, distinct identities that exist independently of
each other within the same person; also known as multiple personality disorder.
678

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). Also known as
shock therapy, the application of mild electric current to
the brain to produce an epileptic-like seizure as a means
of treating certain psychological disorders, primarily severe depression.
Electroencephalograph (EEG). A device used to
record the electrical activity of the brain.
Emotional intelligence. The ability to perceive and
constructively act on both one’s own emotions and the
feelings of others.
Empiricism. Type of research that is based on direct observation.
Encounter group. Group of individuals who engage in intensive and psychotherapeutic interaction, with
the general intention of increasing awareness of self and
sensitivity to others, and improving interpersonal skills.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Endomorph. A body type proposed by William
Sheldon, who characterized endomorphs as heavy and
easy-going.
Enuresis. Also known as bedwetting, the inability
to control urination during periods of sleep.
Equilibrium sense. One of two proprioceptive sensory systems that provide input about the positions of
one’s body.
Ethology. The study of animal behavior as observed
in the natural environment and in the context of evolutionary adaptation.
Etiology. The study of how and why diseases or disorders originate.
Eugenics. The systematic attempt to increase desirable genetic traits and to decrease undesirable ones in a
population.
Experimental design. Careful and detailed plan of
an experiment.
Experimenter bias. The subtle and unintentional
influence of the experimenter on the subjects in an experiment.
Exposure-response prevention. A behavioral treatment technique in which a person is exposed to an anxiety-producing event and kept from responding in an undesirable manner.
Extinction. The elimination of a conditioned response by withholding reinforcement.

Forensic psychology. The application of psychology to lawmaking, law enforcement, the examination of
witnesses, and the treatment of the criminal; also known
as legal psychology.
Forgetting curve. The general, predictable pattern
of the process of forgetting learned information.
Formal operations stage. The fourth stage in Jean
Piaget’s theory of cognitive development characterized
by a person’s ability to reason about abstract concepts.
Fragile x syndrome. A genetic disorder that causes
mental retardation.
Free-recall learning. The presentation of material
to the learner with the subsequent task of recalling as
much as possible about the material without any cues.
Frequency distribution. Systematic representation
of data, arranged so that the observed frequency of occurrence of data falling within certain ranges, classes, or
categories is shown.
Frustration-aggression hypothesis. Theory that
aggression is a response to the frustration of some goaldirected behavior by an outside source.
Fugue. A dissociative disorder in which a person
has no recollection of events during an amnesic episode.
Functional disorder. A psychological disorder for
which no organic cause can be found.
Functionalism. A psychological approach that focuses on how consciousness functions to help human beings adapt to their environment.

G

F
Failure to thrive. Failure of an infant, toddler, or
child to grow at a normal rate.
Familial retardation. Mild mental retardation attributed to environmental causes and generally involving
some degree of psychosocial disadvantage.
Family therapy. The joint treatment of two or more
members of the same family in order to change unhealthy patterns of communication and interaction.
Fetal alcohol effect (FAE) and Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS). The adverse and chronic effects of maternal alcohol abuse during pregnancy on her infant. FAS is
the leading cause of mental retardation.
Figure-ground perception. The ability to visually
differentiate between a sensory stimulation and its background.

Gender identity disorder. A condition in which an
individual develops a gender identity inconsistent with
his or her anatomical and genetic sex.
General adaptation syndrome. A profound physiological reaction to severe stress.
Genital stage. The fifth and last stage in Sigmund
Freud’s theory of psychosexual development in which a
person’s sexual drives are increased and parental attachments are dissolved.
Gestalt psychology. A field of psychology that emphasizes the study of experience and behavior as wholes
rather than independently functioning, disparate parts.
Group therapy. The simultaneous treatment of several clients who meet regularly under the guidance of a
therapist to receive support or to pursue personal change.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

679

Group therapy

Endocrine glands. Ductless glands that secrete hormones into the bloodstream.

Hallucinations

H
Hallucinations. Perception of things or feelings that
have no foundation in reality.
Hallucinogens. Substances that cause hallucination
when ingested.
Halo effect. A type of bias in which one characteristic of a person or one factor in a situation affects the
evaluation of the person’s other traits.
Heuristics. A methodical procedure for discovering
solutions to problems.
Histrionic personality disorder. A maladaptive or
inflexible pattern of behavior characterized by emotional
instability, excitability, over-reactivity, and self-dramatization.
Holtzman inkblot technique. A projective test
used to assess personality characteristics.
Human potential movement. A movement that focuses on helping people achieve their full potential
through an eclectic combination of therapeutic methods
and discipline.
Humanistic psychology. A theoretical and therapeutic approach that emphasizes people’s uniqueness
and their power to control their own destinies.
Hydrocephalus. A condition in which fluid collects
inside the skull.
Hypnosis. A temporary narrowing of conscious
awareness.
Hypochondria. A disorder characterized by an excessive and habitual preoccupation with personal health
and a tendency to interpret insignificant conditions as evidence of serious disease.
Hypothalamus. A section of the forebrain that is involved in such aspects of behavior as motivation, emotion, eating, drinking, and sexuality.

I

Independent variable. The variable the experimenter manipulates in an experiment.
Inductive reasoning. Way of thinking that uses
comparison to reach conclusions.
Industrial psychology. A subfield of applied psychology in which practical problems in the workplace
are addressed through the application of psychological
principles.
Information-processing theory. An orientation that
focuses on how people select, process, and internalize
information and how they use it to make decisions and
guide their behavior.
Instrumental behavior. Behavior exhibited by persons in response to certain stimuli.
Intellectualization. A type of defense mechanism
in which a person detaches himself from a painful or
anxiety-producing situation by dealing with it solely in
intellectual, abstract terms and ignoring its emotional
components.
Interest inventory. A test that determines a person’s
preference for specific fields or activities.
Intermittent explosive disorder. Uncontrollable
episodes of aggression, where the person loses control
and assaults others or destroys property.

J
Just noticeable difference. Scientific calculation of
the average detectable difference between two measurable qualities.

K

Id. In psychoanalytic theory, the most primitive, unconscious element of human personality.
Identification. A type of defense mechanism in
which a person takes on the characteristics of someone
else.
Imprinting. A type of learning characteristic of
fowls that occurs only during a critical period of development soon after birth.
680

Impulse control disorders. A psychological disorder characterized by the repeated inability to refrain
from performing a particular action that is harmful either
to oneself or others.

Kinesthetic sense. The ability to know accurately
the positions and movements of one’s skeletal joints.
Kleptomania. Overwhelming impulse to steal.
Kohlberg’s theory. A theory advanced by Lawrence
Kohlberg on the six stages of moral development.
Kohs block test. Intelligence test most often used
with persons with language or hearing handicaps.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Language acquisition device. Notion that some
knowledge about language is built into the brain of the
human child.

Menarche. The first menstrual period, which occurs
at an average age of 12.8 years for girls in the United
States.

Latency stage. The fourth stage in Sigmund Freud’s
theory of psychosexual development, in which a person’s
sexuality is dormant and his or her attentions are focused
outside the family.

Meningitis. Inflammation of the meninges, most
often caused by infection.

Law of effect. Principle that states that behavior
that leads to a satisfying outcome is likely to be repeated,
while behaviors that lead to undesired outcomes are less
likely to be repeated.
Learned helplessness. An apathetic attitude stemming from the conviction that one’s actions do not have
the power to affect one’s situation.
Learning theory. Theory about how people learn
and modify pre-existing thoughts and behavior.
Learning-to-learn. The phenomenon of greater improvement in speed of learning as one’s experience with
learning increases.
Lobotomy. The severing of the nerves connecting
the frontal lobes of the brain and the thalamus or hypothalamus.
Locus of control. A personality orientation characterized either by the belief that one can control events by
one’s own efforts or that the future is determined by
forces outside one’s control.
Longitudinal study. Research method used to study
changes over time.

Mental age. A scale used to correlate intelligence to
a child’s chronological age.
Merrill-Palmer scales of mental development.
Tests that measure intelligence for children ages 18
months to four years of age.
Mesomorph. A body type proposed by William
Sheldon, who characterized mesomorphs as muscular
and aggressive.
Metapsychology. General term used to describe the
attempt to establish principles to explain all psychological phenomena.
Methylphenidate. The generic name for the drug
Ritalin, the most commonly prescribed medication for
treating attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
Midbrain. Also called mesencephalon, the small
area near the lower middle of the brain that controls
smooth and reflexive movements and regulates attention,
sleep, and arousal.
Milgram’s obedience experiment. A controversial
experiment on conformity and obedience to authority
conducted in the early 1960s by Stanley Milgram.
Minimal brain dysfunction. Term used in connection with hyperactivity and/or attention deficit disorder.

M
Magnetic resonance imaging. Technique for studying the brain using magnetic fields.
Mania. Mood of elation without apparent cause or
justification.
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs. Theory of human
motivation developed by Abraham Maslow that emphasizes developing one’s full potential. The hierarchy is depicted as a pyramid with five levels, ranging from the
most basic needs at the bottom to the most complex and
sophisticated at the top.
Mean. The sum of the values of the points in a data
set divided by the number of points.
Median. The middle value in a group of measurements.

Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory.
Test used to gather information on personality, attitudes,
and mental health.
Mnemonic strategies. Any technique used for the
purpose of memorizing or improving the function of
memory in general.
Mode. The most frequently occurring member of a
set of numbers.
Montessori method. A progressive system of education for early childhood through adolescence developed by Maria Montessori, emphasizing individualized,
self-directed study.
Muscular dystrophy. A category of inherited, incurable, and often life-threatening diseases in which the
limb and trunk muscles deteriorate.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

681

Muscular dystrophy

L

Melancholia. Outdated term for depression itself and
a clinically defined characteristic of major depression.

Narcissism

N
Narcissism. Excessive preoccupation with self and
lack of empathy for others.
Narcolepsy. A sleep disorder whose primary symptoms is irresistible attacks of sleepiness during the daytime.
Negativism. Tendency to resist complying with suggestions or directions.
Neocortex. The exterior covering of the cerebral
hemispheres of the brain.
Nervous system. An electrochemical conducting
network that transmits messages from the brain through
the nerves to locations throughout the body.
Neuron. Technical term for nerve cell, responsible
for sending, receiving, and storing signals through a
unique blend of electricity and chemistry.
Neurosis. Term used to describe conditions involving anxiety or psychological distress.
Neurosurgery. Surgery of the nervous system.
Neurotransmitter. Chemical substances or molecules that aid in message transmission between neurons.
Nicotine. Addictive substance in cigarettes.
Night terrors. A childhood sleep disorder featuring
behavior that appears to be intense fear.

Organic disorder. Disorder caused by a known
pathological condition.

P
Paired-associate learning. Pairing of two items
(usually words) as stimulus and response.
Panic/panic disorders. Acute feelings of intense
fear, accentuated by increased heart rate, shortness of
breath, sweating, and mild convulsions.
Paralysis agitans. Another name for Parkinson’s
disease, a relatively common degenerative disorder of
the central nervous system.
Paranoia. A pervasive feeling of distrust of others.
Paraphilia. Sexual feelings or behaviors that may
involve sexual partners that are not human, not consenting, or that involve suffering by one or both partners.
Common types of paraphilia are bestiality, exhibitionism, masochism, pedophilia, sadomasochism, and
voyeurism.
Parapsychology. The study of paranormal phenomena, the most significant being ESP and psychokinesis.
Parasomnia. Sleeping disorder that involves unusual phenomena such as nightmares, sleep terrors, and
sleepwalking that occur during sleep or during the period
between sleeping and waking.

O
Obsessive-compulsive disorder. Mental illness
characterized by the recurrence of intrusive, anxiety-producing thoughts accompanied by repeated attempts to
suppress these thoughts through the performance of certain irrational, often ritualistic, behaviors.
Oedipus complex. Theory set forth by Sigmund
Freud that children are torn between feelings of love for
one parent while feeling a sense of competition with the
other.
Operant conditioning. Approach to human learning based on the premise that human intelligence and
will operate on the environment rather than merely respond to the environment’s stimuli.
Opiates. Addictive narcotic drug derived from
opium.
Oppositional-defiant disorder. A form of antisocial behavior disorder characterized by opposition to authority figures and by excessive anger and hostility.
682

Oral stage. The first stage in Sigmund Freud’s theory of psychosexual development in which a child is primarily concerned with gratification through sucking.

Passive-aggressive personality. A pattern of behavior characterized by indirect resistance to the demands or
expectations of others, usually by covert means.
Pedophilia. Sexual activity with a child, generally
under the age of 13.
Penis envy. According to psychoanalytic theory, a
girl’s wish for a penis; she blames her mother for depriving her of a penis and desires her father because he possesses one.
Perception. Area of psychology associated with the
functioning of sensory systems and how information
from the external world is interpreted.
Perfectionism. Tendency to set unrealistically high
standards for performance of oneself and others, along
with the inability to accept mistakes or imperfections.
Pervasive development disorder. A group of conditions involving serious impairment in several areas of

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Phallic stage. The third stage in Sigmund Freud’s
theory of psychosexual development in which a child experiences and resolves the Oedipal crisis and assumes
his or her sexual identity.
Phenomenological therapy. Also called humanistic
therapy, an approach emphasizing a close, supportive relationship between the client and the therapist. Two wellknown forms of phenomenological therapy are clientcentered therapy and Gestalt therapy.
Phenylketonuria (PKU). An inherited metabolic
disease caused by a defect in the liver enzyme that prevents the conversion of the protein called phenylalanine
into a useful form.
Phobia. An intense, irrational, persistent fear that
interferes with normal functioning.
Phonation disorders. Disturbances in speech timbre, intensity, or pitch.
Placebo effect. A scientifically significant response
that cannot be explained by physiological variables and
is assumed to be psychological in origin.

Psychoanalysis. A method of treatment developed
by Sigmund Freud that emphasizes thorough examination of a person’s unconscious motivations, feelings, and
relationships.
Psychobiology. Developed by Adolf Meyer, the integration of psychology and biology to treat the whole
person.
Psychokinesis. The ability to manipulate physical
objects with the mind.
Psycholinguistics. The psychology of language.
Psychophysics. Subfield of psychology that studies
the transformation from the physical to the psychological.
Psychosexual stages. Stages of development described by Sigmund Freud that focuses on the location of
sexual impulses at different ages.
Psychosis. A symptom of mental illness characterized by a radical change in personality and a distorted or
diminished sense of objective reality.
Psychosomatic disorders. Physical illnesses that
are believed to be psychologically based.

Positron emission tomography. Technique for
studying the chemistry and activity of the brain and to
diagnose abnormalities such as tumors.

Psychostimulants. Also called stimulants, drugs
that produce increased levels of mental and physical energy and alertness and an elevated mood by stimulating
the central nervous system.

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). A psychological disorder that develops in response to an extremely traumatic event that threatens a person’s safety or life.

Psychosurgery. Medical procedure in which specific areas of the brain are destroyed or disabled through
surgery as treatment for mental illness.

Preconscious. According to Sigmund Freud, that
part of the human mind that lies between the conscious
and the unconscious, which can be accessed and brought
into consciousness without the use of special techniques.

Psychotherapy. The treatment of mental or emotional disorders through the use of psychological techniques rather than through physical or biological means.
Pyromania. Irresistible urge to start fires.

Preoperational stage. The second stage in Jean Piaget’s theory of cognitive development characterized by
egocentrism, centration, and irreversibility in thought.
Primal therapy. A type of treatment method where
early traumas are re-experienced in physical ways.
Programmed learning. A method of self-instruction that enlists machines or specially prepared books to
teach information.
Projection. A type of defense mechanism in which
a person assigns to others characteristics or motivations
that an individual would prefer not to recognize in himself.
Projective techniques. Unstructured tests used in
personality assessment that rely on the subject’s interpretation of ambiguous stimuli.
Psychoactive drugs. Category of drugs that affect
mood and behavior.

R
Rating scale. Any instrument designed to assist in
the measurement of subjective evaluation.
Rational-emotive behavior therapy. A mode of
treatment developed by Albert Ellis in which a client is
challenged to examine his or her irrational beliefs and
taught to think more rationally with the goal of reducing
emotional problems.
Rationalization. A type of defense mechanism in
which a person gives an intellectual reason or rationale
for an emotionally motivated action in order to assign
socially acceptable motives to one’s behavior or to mask
disappointment.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

683

Rationalization

development, including physical, behavioral, cognitive,
social, and language development.

Reaction formation

Reaction formation. A type of defense mechanism
in which a person deals with unacceptable feelings by
adopting diametrically opposite ones.

Scapegoating. A powerful and destructive phenomenon wherein a person or group of people are blamed for
whatever is wrong.

Readiness test. A test designed to assess the developmental condition of an individual to determine whether
he or she would benefit from some particular experience.

Schemas. A term defined by Jean Piaget as the
basic units of knowledge that a person uses to organize
past experiences and to understand new ones.

Reflective listening. A way of responding to a person in order to create empathy. Often used in a therapeutic setting, this technique involves accepting the person as
he is and trying to understand the other person’s reality.

Schizophrenia. A mental illness characterized by
disordered thinking, delusions, hallucinations, emotional
disturbance, and withdrawal from reality.

Regression. A type of defense mechanism in which
a person reverts to behavior characteristic of an earlier
period of life in order to gain access to the sources of
gratification experienced during that period.

Scholastic Assessment Test. Series of tests used to
measure verbal and mathematical abilities and achievement in specific subject areas.

Reinforcement. A stimulus that increases the probability that a particular behavior will occur.

Seasonal affective disorder. A bipolar disorder associated with lack of light and melatonin excess in the
body. It generally corresponds to the seasons and how
much light a person experiences.

Reliability (in testing). Term used in testing to describe tests that produce consistent and reproducible results.

Seizures. A temporary series of uncontrollable muscle spasms brought on by unusual electrical activity in
the brain.

Repression. A principal defense mechanism in
which a person selectively forgets disturbing material.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
A category of antidepressants, including Prozac, Zoloft,
and Paxil.

Ribonucleic acid (RNA). A complex organic substance involved in protein synthesis in cells.
Rorschach technique. Popularly known as the
“Inkblot Test,” a widely used projective psychological
test used to assess personality structure and identify
emotional problems.
Rosenzweig picture frustration study. A projective test consisting of 24 cartoon pictures, each portraying a frustrating situation, used to assess personality
characteristics.

Self-actualization. The final and most complex step
in Abraham Maslow’s hierarchy of human motives, encompassing the basic need for self-fulfillment.
Self-conscious emotions. Emotions such as guilt,
pride, shame, and hubris.
Semantic memory. The part of long-term memory
dealing with words, their symbols, and meanings.
Sensitivity training. A group experience that gives
people new insight into how they relate to others.
Sensorimotor stage. The first stage in Jean Piaget’s
theory of cognitive development characterized by a
child’s ability to grasp properties of objects and the concept of object constancy.

S

Sensory deprivation. An experimental procedure
involving prolonged reduction of sensory stimuli.

Sadomasochism. Sexual behavior in which an individual achieves gratification either by experiencing pain
or inflicting pain on another person.
Satanic ritualistic abuse. Activities such as cannibalism, animal sacrifice, and child sexual abuse that are
assumed to be carried out by organized underground
cults.
Savant syndrome. A condition in which a person
has below normal intelligence combined with a special
talent or ability in a specific area; also known as autistic
savant or idiot savant.
684

Serial learning. Recalling patterns of facts or stimuli in the order in which they were presented.
Serial position function. The predictable patterns
of memory and forgetting when a person is presented
with a list of stimuli.
Shaping. A gradual behavior modification technique in which successive approximations to the desired
behavior is rewarded.
Signal detection theory. A psychological theory regarding a threshold of sensory detection.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Skinner box. A specially made cage with levers for
releasing food.
Sleep apnea. Disrupted breathing that wakens a person repeatedly during the night.

T
Tay-Sachs disease. A genetically transmitted disease of the central nervous system affecting young children.

Social cognitive theory. Also known as social
learning theory.

Temperament. An individual’s characteristic emotional nature, including energy level, prevailing mood,
and sensitivity to stimuli.

Social learning theory. A theory that posits that
people learn behavior by copying “models” and receiving reinforcements.

Thalamus. A collection of cell body clusters located in the middle of the forebrain that process sensory information.

Social referencing. The process by which infants
seek out and interpret the emotional responses of their
parents to form their own emotional understanding of
unfamiliar events, objects, or persons.

Thematic apperception test. A psychological test,
in which subjects are shown a series of pictures and
asked to make up a story, used to assess personality.

Sociobiology. A field of study combining biology
and social sciences.

Tourette syndrome. A genetic, neurological disorder characterized by motor and vocal tics and associated
behavioral features including obsessions and compulsions and hyperactivity.

Somnambulism. Also known as sleepwalking, a
disorder that involves getting out of bed and moving
about while still asleep.

Traits. A stable, relatively permanent characteristic.

Specific language impairment. A condition of
markedly delayed language development in the absence
of any apparent handicapping conditions.

Transference. The tendency of clients to transfer to
the therapist their emotional responses to significant
people in their lives.

Split-brain technique. Procedures used to study the
activities of the two hemispheres of the brain separately,
and independent of each other.

Transsexualism. Condition in which a person defines him or herself as male or female in opposition to
physical gender, sometimes seeking surgical procedures
to change from one sex to the other.

Stanford-Binet intelligence scales. A widely used
test to measure intelligence.
Stanford Progressive Matrices (SPM). A test that
assesses intelligence nonverbally in children and adults.
Strange situation. A research technique developed
by Mary Ainsworth and used in the assessment of attachments.
Stranger anxiety. Fear of people with whom a child
is not familiar.

Triangulation. A situation in which two persons
deal with the tension between them by using a third person as a buffer.
Trichotillomania. Uncontrollable or overwhelming
urge to pull out one’s own hair.
Type A personality. A personality characterized by
competitive achievement, time urgency, and aggressiveness or hostility when frustrated.

Sublimations. A type of defense mechanism in
which unacceptable impulse is diverted to a more appropriate or socially acceptable form. It differs from displacement in that sublimations are generally associated
with the conversion of impulses to scientific, artistic, and
other creative or intellectual activities.

U

Superego. In psychoanalytic theory, the part of the
human personality that represents a person’s inner values
and morals; also known as conscience.

Unconditioned response. Response that is natural
and not learned, such as jerking the hand from a hot
stove.

Sympathetic nervous system. Part of the autonomic nervous system that mobilizes the body for action.

Unconditioned stimulus. Stimulus that naturally
elicits behavior, such as food.

Synapse. The tiny gap through which communication between two neurons takes place.

Unconscious. The part of the mind whose contents
people resist bringing into awareness.

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

685

Unconscious

Significance level. A method to describe the reliability of test results.

Validity (in testing)

V
Validity (in testing). Term used in testing to describe tests that measure what they are intended to measure.
Vocational aptitude test. A predictive test designed
to measure an individual’s potential for success and satisfaction in any of various occupations and professions.
Voyeurism. A sexual disorder in which a person
finds sexual excitement in watching unsuspecting people
who are nude, undressing, or having sex.

W
Wechsler intelligence scales. Series of intelligence
tests encompassing both verbal and nonverbal abilities.
Wernicke’s aphasia. A type of aphasia in which a
person’s speech is overflowing with words that do not
convey meaning.

686

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

PSYCHOLOGICAL ORGANIZATIONS

Albert Ellis Institute
45 E. 65th St.
New York, NY 10021 USA
Phone:(212) 535-0822
Fax: (212) 249-3582
Toll-Free: 800-323-4738
E-Mail: info@rebt.org
URL: http://www.rebt.org
Alfred Adler Institute (AAI)
24 E. 21st St., Fl. 8
New York, NY 10010-7200 USA
Phone:(212) 254-1048
Fax: (212) 254-8271
American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry (AACAP)
3615 Wisconsin Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20016-3007 USA
Phone:(202) 966-7300
Fax: (202) 966-2891
Toll-Free: 800-333-7636
E-Mail: executive@aacap.org
URL: http://www.aacap.org
American Academy of
Psychoanalysis (AAP)
47 E. 19th St.
New York, NY 10003-1323 USA
Phone:(212) 475-7980
Fax: (212) 475-8101
E-Mail: aapny@aol.com
URL: http://www.aapsa.org
American Anorexia Bulimia
Association (AA/BA)
165 W. 46th St., 1108
New York, NY 10036 USA
Phone:(212) 575-6200
Fax: (212) 278-0698
E-Mail: amanbu@aol.com
URL: http://www.aabainc.org
American Board of Professional
Psychology (ABPP)
514 E. Capitol Ave.
Jefferson City, MO 65101-3008 USA
Phone:(573) 875-1267
Fax: (573) 443-1199
Toll-Free: 800-255-7792

E-Mail: ambra@abpp.org
URL: http://www.abpp.org
American Board of Psychological
Hypnosis (ABPH)
c/o Samuel M. Migdole, Ed.D., ABPH
North Shore Counseling Center
23 Broadway
Beverly, MA 01915 USA
Phone:(978) 922-2280
Fax: (978) 927-1758
American Psychological Association
(APA)
750 First St. NE
Washington, DC 20002-4242 USA
Phone:(202) 336-5500
Fax: (202) 336-5997
Toll-Free: 800-374-2721
E-Mail: executiveoffice@apa.org
URL: http://www.apa.org/
American Psychological Society
(APS)
1010 Vermont Ave. NW, Ste. 1100
Washington, DC 20005-4907 USA
Phone:(202) 783-2077
Fax: (202) 783-2083
E-Mail: aps@aps.washington.dc.us
URL: http://www.psychological
science.org
American Psychopathological
Association (APPA)
Dept-Psyc University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 USA
Phone:(803) 852-4190
Fax: (803) 852-4195
Anorexia Nervosa and Related
Eating Disorders (ANRED)
PO Box 5102
Eugene, OR 97405 USA
Phone:(541) 344-1144
E-Mail: jarinor@rio.com
URL: http://www.anred.com
Association for Advancement of
Behavior Therapy (AABT)
305 7th Ave., Ste. 16A

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

New York, NY 10001-6008 USA
Phone:(212) 647-1890
Fax: (212) 647-1865
Toll-Free: 800-685-AABT
E-Mail: info@aabt.org
URL: http://www.aabt.org/
Association for Advancement of
Psychology (AAP)
PO Box 38129
Colorado Springs, CO 80937 USA
Phone:(719) 520-0688
Fax: (719) 520-0375
Toll-Free: 800-869-6595
Association for Child Psychology and
Psychiatry (ACPP)
St. Saviours House
39/41 Union St.
London SE1 1SD, England
Phone:44 171 4037458
Fax: 44 171 4037081
E-Mail: cjackson@acpp.co.uk
Association for Humanistic
Psychology (AHP)
45 Franklin St., No. 315
San Francisco, CA 94102 USA
Phone:(415) 864-8850
Fax: (415) 864-8853
E-Mail: ahpoffice@aol.com
URL: http://www.ahpweb.org
Association for the Advancement of
Applied Sport Psychology
c/o Jim Whelan, Ph.D.
Univ. of Memphis
Dept. of Psychology
Memphis, TN 38152-1389 USA
Phone:(901) 678-2147
URL: http://www.aaasponline.org
Association for the Teaching of
Psychology
c/o British Psychological Society
48 Princess Rd., E
Leicester LE1 7DR, England
687

Association for Women in Psychology (AWP)

Association for Women in Psychology
(AWP)
PO Box 11474
Portland, OR 97211 USA
URL: http://www.theworks.baka.com/
awp/
Association of Black Psychologists
(ABPsi)
PO Box 55999
Washington, DC 20040-5999 USA
Phone:(202) 722-0808
Fax: (202) 722-5941
E-Mail: admin@abpsi.org
URL: http://www.abpsi.org
Association of Psychology
Postdoctoral and Internship
Centers (APPIC)
733 15th St. NW, Ste. 719
Washington, DC 20005-2112 USA
Phone:(202) 347-0022
Fax: (202) 347-8480
E-Mail: appic@aol.com
URL: http://www.appic.org
C. G. Jung Foundation for Analytical
Psychology
28 E. 39th St.
New York, NY 10016 USA
Phone:(212) 697-6430
Fax: (212) 953-3989
E-Mail: cgjungny@aol.com
Canadian Psychological Association
(CPA)
Societe Canadienne de Psychologie
(SCP)
151 Slater St., Ste. 205
Ottawa, ON, Canada K1P 5H3
Phone:(613) 237-2144
Fax: (613) 237-1674
E-Mail: cpa@cpa.ca
Canadian Society for Psychomotor
Learning and Sport Psychology
Societe Canadienne d’Apprentissage
Psychomoteur et de Psychologie du
Sport
Faculty of Kinesiology
University of Calgary
Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 1N4
Phone:(403) 492-2187
Fax: (403) 492-2364
URL: http://www.scapps.org
Center for the Study of Psychiatry
and Psychology
4628 Chestnut St.
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA
Phone:(301) 652-5580
Fax: (301) 652-5924
688

International Association for Child
and Adolescent Psychiatry and
Allied Professions (IACAPAP)
PO Box 207900
New Haven, CT 06520-7900 USA
Phone:(203) 785-5759
Fax: (203) 785-7402
E-Mail: donald.cohen@yale.edu
International Council of
Psychologists (ICP)
Psych Department
Southwest Texas State Univ.
San Marcos, TX 78666-4601 USA
Phone:(512) 245-7605
Fax: (512) 245-3153
E-Mail: jd04@academia.swt.edu
International Dyslexia Association
8600 LaSalle Rd.
Baltimore, MD 21286-2044 USA
Phone:(410) 296-0232
Fax: (410) 321-5069
Toll-Free: 800-ABCD-123
E-Mail: info@interdys.org
URL: http://www.interdys.org
International Society for
Comparative Psychology (ISCP)
PO Box 1897
Lawrence, KS 66044-8897 USA
Phone:(913) 843-1235
Fax: (913) 843-1274
E-Mail: rmmurphey@ucdavis.edu
URL: http://www.psy.tcu.edu/psy/iscp/
iscp.html
International Society for
Developmental Psychobiology
(ISDP)
c/o Dr. Robert Lickliter
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA 24061-0436 USA
Phone:(540) 231-5346
Fax: (540) 231-3652
E-Mail: duckling@vt.edu
International Society of Political
Psychology (ISPP)
c/o Dana Ward, Exec. Dir.
ISPP Central Office
Pitzer College
1050 N. Mills Ave.
Claremont, CA 91711 USA
Phone:(909) 621-8442
Fax: (909) 621-8481
E-Mail: ispp@pitzer.edu
International Society of Sports
Psychology (ISSP)
c/o Prof. Glyn C. Roberts
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign
Department of Kinesiology
906 S. Goodwin Ave.
Urbana, IL 61801 USA

Phone:(217) 333-2461
Fax: (217) 244-7322
Jean Piaget Society: Society for the
Study of Knowledge and
Development (JPSSSKD)
Human Development
Larsen Hall
Harvard GS Education
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA
Phone:(617) 495-3614
Fax: (617) 495-3626
URL: http://www.piaget.org
Mental Research Institute (MRI)
555 Middlefield Rd.
Palo Alto, CA 94301 USA
Phone:(650) 321-3055
Fax: (650) 321-3785
E-Mail: mri@mri.org
URL: http://www.mri.org
National Association for Sport and
Physical Education (NASPE)
1900 Association Dr.
Reston, VA 20191 USA
Phone:(703) 476-3410
Fax: (703) 476-8316
Toll-Free: 800-213-7193
E-Mail: naspe@aahperd.org
National Association of School
Psychologists (NASP)
4340 East West Hwy., Ste. 402
Bethesda, MD 20814-4411 USA
Phone:(301) 657-0270
Fax: (301) 657-0275
E-Mail: ahyman@naspweb.org
URL: http://www.naspweb.org
National Eating Disorder
Information Centre (NEDIC)
College Wing, 1-211
200 Elizabeth St.
Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 2C4
Phone:(416) 340-4156
Fax: (416) 340-3430
E-Mail: mbear@torhosp.toronto.on.ca
URL: http://www.nedic.on.ca
National Eating Disorders
Organization (NEDO)
6655 S. Yale Ave.
Tulsa, OK 74136 USA
Phone:(918) 481-4044
Fax: (918) 481-4076
URL: http://www.laureate.com
National Guild of Hypnotists (NGH)
PO Box 308
Merrimack, NH 03054-0308 USA
Phone:(603) 429-9438
Fax: (603) 424-8066
E-Mail: ngn@ngn.net

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

1010 Vermont Ave., Ste. 1100
Washington, DC 20005 USA
Phone (202) 393-4810
Fax: (202) 783-2083
E-Mail: spr@aps.washington.dc.us
URL: http://www.sprweb.org/

Psychology Society (PS)
100 Beekman St.
New York, NY 10038-1810 USA
Phone:(212) 285-1872

Society for Research in the
Psychology of Music and Music
Education
c/o Music Dept.
University of Sheffield
Sheffield S10 2TN, England
Phone:44 114 2667234
Fax: 44 114 2668053

Society for Pediatric Psychology
(SPP)
c/o Conway Saylor, Ph.D.
Department of Psychiatry
The Citadel
Charleston, SC 29409 USA
Phone:(843) 953-5320
Fax: (843) 953-6797
Society for Psychophysiological
Research (SPR)
c/o Connie Duncan

Society for Sex Therapy and
Research (SSTAR)
c/o Dr. P. Schreiner-Engel
Mt. Sinai Medical Ctr.
1176 Fifth Ave., Box 1170
New York, NY 10029 USA
Phone:(212) 241-6758
Fax: (212) 360-6917

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Society for the Advancement of
Social Psychology (SASP)
c/o Francis C. Dane
Department of Psychology
Mercer University
1400 Coleman Ave.
Macon, GA 31207-0001 USA
Phone:(912) 752-2972
Fax: (912) 752-2956
E-Mail: dane_fc@mercer.edu
Society for the Psychological Study of
Lesbian, Gay and Bisexual Issues
(SPSLGBI)
c/o American Psychological Association
750 1st St. NE
Washington, DC 20002-4242 USA
Phone:(202) 336-6037
Fax: (202) 336-6040
Toll-Free: 800-374-2721
URL: http://www.apa.org/divisions/
div44

689

Society for the Psychological Study of Lesbian, Gay and Bisexual Issues (SPSLGBI)

Play Therapy International (PTI)
11E-900 Greenbank Rd., Ste. 527
Nepean, ON, Canada K2J 4P6
Phone:(613) 634-3125
E-Mail: pti@playtherapy.org
URL: http://www.playtherapy.org/

INDEX

A
Ability 1
standardized tests 4
Abnormal psychology 1–2
Abortion 2–3
Absolute threshold 3, 521
Accommodation 49
Acculturation 3–4
Achievement 1
Achievement motivation 4
Achievement tests 4–5
Scholastic Assessment Test 560
Ackerman, Nathan Ward 5–6
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome. See AIDS.
Action potential 7
ADA 31
Adaptation 7–8, 49
conformity 149
culture and 3
Addiction/Addictive personality 8–10
compulsive overeating 9
ADHD. See Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).
Adjustment disorders 10
Adler, Alfred 10–11, 11 (ill.), 231, 328
Adolescence/Adolescents 11–15
alcohol dependence and abuse 25
battered child syndrome 66
cliques 127
cognitive transition 12
conduct disorder 147
egocentrism 211
emotional development 216
gangs 270
juvenile delinquency 349
obesity 462
parent-child relationship 476
peer acceptance 481
personal fable 211
sexual orientation 306
Adoption 15–19
Adorno, Theodor 60
Adrenal glands 310
Advertising 152
Affect 19–20, 41
Affiliation 19–20

Aggression 20–22, 312, 656
bullies 102
See also Television and aggression.
Aging 22–23
dementia 172
middle years 427
AIDS 6–7
Ainsworth, Mary D. 23–24
Strange Situation test 51, 632
Alcohol dependence and abuse 8, 24–26
children of alcoholics 24
fetal alcohol syndrome 248
Alienation 26–28, 263
Allport, Gordon 28–29, 29 (ill.)
assimilation 50
trait theory 649
Altered consciousness 151
Alzheimer’s disease 30, 44, 172
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 30
American Association of Humanistic
Psychology 314
American Family Therapy Association
91
American Foundation for Mental Hygiene 70
American Psychiatric Association 32
American Psychological Association
32–33, 104, 207, 290
Psychological Abstracts 517
American Psychological Society (APS)
33
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
31
Ames Room 31
Amnesia 31–32
See also Memory.
Anal stage 522
Anastasi, Anne 33–35
Anger 21, 35, 312
Anima and animus 46, 47
Animal behavior, study of 229
Animal experimentation 35–37
The Animal Mind 661
Animal research 141
Anna O. 98
Anomic aphasia 44
Anorexia 37–38, 85, 203
Antidepressants 38–39

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Antisocial behavior 39–41
juvenile delinquency 349
television 640
Antisocial behavior disorders
conduct disorder 146
oppositional-defiant disorder 466
Antisocial personality disorder 41–42,
494
Anxiety/Anxiety disorders 1, 42–43, 518
test anxiety 643
obsessive-compulsive disorder 462
post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) 505
Apgar score 43, 82
Apgar, Virginia 43
Aphasia 43–45, 376
Wernicke’s aphasia 666
Appearance
body image 85
Applied psychology 45–46, 520
Aptitude/Aptitude tests 1, 46, 659–660
Archetypes 46–47, 348
Ardrey, Robert 21
Arousal theory 440
Art therapy 48–49, 451
Artificial intelligence 47–48
Asch, Solomon 149
Asperger’s disorder 497
Assembly for Scientific and Applied
Psychology 33
Assessment, psychological 49
Draw-a-person test 195
Holtzman inkblot technique 305
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
Inventory 431, 495
Rorschach technique 512, 550–551
Rosenzweig picture frustration
study 552
Thematic Apperception Test 19, 49,
439, 512, 644
Assimilation 4, 49–50
Associationism 50
Attachment 50–52, 296, 474
bonding 86
stages of 51
Attachment and Loss 51
Attention 52, 488
Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) 52–55
691

Attitude

adoption 18
antisocial behavior 40
Tourette syndrome 647
See also Minimal brain dysfunction.
Attitude
attitude change 56–57
behavior 55–56
brainwashing 96
self-esteem 57
Attraction, interpersonal 57–58
Attribution theory 58–59, 299, 607
Authoritarian personality 59–60
Autism 60–61, 422
echolalia 206
savant syndrome 557
See also Pervasive development disorder (PDD).
Autoeroticism 15, 61
Autonomic effectors 208
Autonomic nervous system 61–62, 454
Aversion therapy 124
Avoidance 668
Avoidance learning 63, 280
Avoidant personality 63–64, 494
Axline, Virginia 504

B
Baby and Child Care 622
Bain, Alexander 50
Bandura, Albert 65 (ill.), 65–66, 606
modeling 324, 433
imitative learning 324
Bard, Phillip 218
Battered child syndrome 66–67
Battle fatigue. See Combat neurosis.
Bayley Scales of Infant Development
68–69
Bayley, Nancy 67–68
Beck, Aaron T. 69–70, 128, 134
Beers, Clifford 70, 70 (ill.), 427
Behavior
animals 229
attitude and 55, 56
autism 61
avoidance learning 63
bullying 102
cognitive factors in 65, 132
ethics 226
instinct 332
interpretation 299
locus of control 392
modification 71, 178, 588
negativism 452
personality 110, 490
punishment 530
Behavior therapy 71–72, 526, 538
anxiety disorders 42
conditioning 124, 156
family therapy 242
motivation 440
Wolpe, Joseph 668
692

Behavior, abnormal 1
Behavior, biological nature of. See Sociobiology.
Behavior, instrumental 333
Behavioral theory of personality 491
Behaviorism 36, 72–73, 265
associationism 50
classical conditioning 124
Watson, John Broadus 662
Bellevue-Wechsler Scale 663
Bem, Daryl 57
Bender-Gestalt Test 73
Berkeley, George 50
Bestiality 471
Bettelheim, Bruno 73–74, 74 (ill.)
Beyondism 108
Bilingualism/Bilingual education
74–76, 366
Binet, Alfred 76, 334
intelligence tests 335
Binge eating disorder 38
Binocular depth cues 77, 177
Binswanger, Ludwig 90
Biofeedback 62, 77–78
Biographical Sketch of an Infant 115,
167
Bipolar disorder 78–79, 402
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
209
Birth 81–84
home delivery 83
Birth defects 83
Birth order 79–81
Birth trauma 81
Bisexuality 84–85
Body dysmorphic disorder 85
Body image 85–86
Bonding 86–88, 91, 297
Borderline behavior disorder
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT)
89
Borderline personality 88–89, 90 495
Boredom 90
Boss, Medard 90
Bowen, Murray 90–91
Bowlby, John 23, 91–92
attachment theory 51
Boys
autism 60
puberty 12, 527
Brain 93–95, 94 (ill.), 109, 109 (ill.),
138 (ill.)
abnormal function 399
Broca’s area 44 (ill.), 94, 99
disorders of 30, 92–93
electrical stimulation of 208
hemispheres 385, 548
linguistic ability 44
neocortex 452
specialized functions 99
split-brain technique 621
thalamus 643
tumors 92

Wernicke’s area 44, 44 (ill.), 93,
666
Brain disorders
Alzheimer’s disease 30, 44, 172
epilepsy 223–224
Parkinson’s disease 477
stroke 92
Brain stem 93
Brainwashing 96
cults 163–165
Brazelton, T. Berry 96–97, 97 (ill.)
Breuer, Josef 97–98
catharsis 106
Brief reactive psychosis 98–99
Broad effect 19
Broca, Paul 44, 99–100, 293, 385
Broca’s area 44 (ill.), 94, 99
Brown v. Board of Education 121
Browne, Thomas 50
Bruner, Jerome 100 (ill.), 100–101
mental sets 131, 133
Bulimia 38, 101–102, 203
Bullies 102
Bystander effect 102–103

C
CAGE test 26
California Psychological Inventory 495
Calkins, Mary Whiton 104 (ill.),
104–105
Canadian National Committee for Mental Hygiene 70
Cannabis. See Marijuana.
Cannon, Walter 218
Cannon-Bard theory of emotion 218
A Case of Hysteria 516
Case study methodologies 105–106
Cataplexy 447
Catharsis 21, 106
Cathexis 106–107
Cattell, James McKeen 107–108
Cattell, Raymond 108 (ill.), 108–109
Central nervous system 93, 109–110,
453
Cerebellum 93, 95
Cerebral cortex 94
Cerebrum 93
Character 110–111, 543
Charcot, Jean Martin 111 (ill.),
111–112
Child abuse 66–67, 112–115
satanic ritual abuse 114, 555
Child development 115–116
adolescence 11
Bayley Scales of Infant Development 68
effect of family size on 241
emotional transition 13
Gesell Development Schedules 116
Gesell, Arnold 277
Gestalt theory 357

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Cognitive behavior therapy 128–129,
135, 212
Cognitive development 129–131
Cognitive dissonance 132–133, 247
Cognitive psychology 133–134, 520
Cognitive therapy 69, 134–136, 526
anxiety disorders 42
attribution theory 58
avoidance personality 64
borderline personality disorder 89
Cognitive transition 12
Coles, Robert Martin 136 (ill.),
136–137
Collective unconscious 46
Color vision 137, 364
Coma 137–139
Combat neurosis 139
Combat stress reaction (CRS) 430
Combat, psychology of 429, 430
Combe, George 499
Communication skills and disorders
139–141
Communitarianism 28
Comparative psychology 141
Compendium der Psychiatrie 361
Compensation 168, 170
Competence to stand trial 141–142
Competition 142–143
Compliance 605
Compulsive overeating 9
Concentration. See Attention.
Concept formation 143–144
Conceptualization 131
Conditioned response 144, 231, 478
extinction 237
Conditioned stimulus 144–145
Conditioning 62, 71, 145–146,
464–465
counterconditioning 156–157
Conduct disorder 40, 146–148
Conflict resolution 148–149
peer mediation 482
Conformity 149–150
Milgram’s obedience experiment
428
peer pressure 485
social influence 605
Congruence 125
Conscience 150
Consciousness 150–151
Conservation of energy 301
Constructive alternativism 353
Consumer psychology 152–153
Contiguity 50
Contrast 153
Control group 153–154, 234-236
Control, locus of. See Locus of control.
Convergent thinking 154, 158, 159
Conversion hysteria 154
Conversion reaction 154
Coordination, hand-eye 294
Correlational method 155
Cortex 452
Counseling psychology 155–156

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

client-centered therapy 156
Counterconditioning 156–157
Covert sensitization 157
Creativity 157–159
imagination 323
Creativity tests 159–160
Crick, Francis 173
Criminal trials
competency 141
insanity defense 330
Crisis intervention 160–161
Critical period 161–162
Cross-cultural psychology 162–163
Cross-sectional study 163, 394
Crus cerebri 110
Cults 163–165
Cultural pluralism 4
Cultural-familial. See Familial retardation.
Culture
conformity 150
cultural differences in children 118
cross-cultural psychology 162
emotional expression 19
intelligence tests 165
personality formation 410
Culture, adaptation to. See Acculturation.
Culture-fair test 165
Cyclothymic disorder 176
Cylert 54

D
Dark Ghetto: Dilemmas of Social
Power 121
Darwin, Charles Robert 115, 166 (ill.),
166–167
Daseinanalysis 90
Daydreaming 167–168
Death
loss and grief 397–399
near-death experience 451
suicide 634–636
Deductive reasoning 168
Defense mechanisms 168–170, 517
Degenerative brain disorders 30
Delay of gratification 171
Delayed response 365
Delayed speech 170
Delirium 171
Delusion/Delusional disorders
171–172
Dementia 172
Dementia infantilis 497
Dendrite 173
Denial 35, 168, 169
Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
173–174
Dependent personality disorder 174
Dependent variable 174–175, 234, 236
Depression 175–176, 312
693

Depression

language 365, 368
puberty 11
Spock, Benjamin 622
Child psychology 119–120
Childhood 116–119
psychosexual stages of development
521
Childhood disintegrative disorder 496
Children
abuse. See Child abuse.
alcohol dependence and abuse 24,
26
Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) 52
autism 60
aversive conditioning 62
bullies 102
causes of disability in 189
cognitive development 129
conduct disorder 146
emotional development 214
feral. See Feral children.
guilt 286
hyperactivity. See Attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD).
language development 372, 614
mother-child bonding 91
motor skills 251, 283
oral history 136
parent-child relationship 474
peer acceptance 481
physical development 117
play 503
role-taking 252
security objects 563
self-esteem 571
separation anxiety 574
sibling rivalry 79
social competence 598
stimulant medications 54
stranger anxiety 631
Chomsky, Noam 120 (ill.), 120–121
behaviorism 73
language acquisition 131
psycholinguistics 134
Clairvoyance 472
Clark, Kenneth Bancroft 121–124
Classical conditioning 124, 145
conditioned response 144
operant conditioning 464
reinforcement 544
Client-centered therapy 124–125, 549
empathy 219
marriage counseling 404
reflective listening 541
Clinical psychology 125–127, 414,
520
Cliques 127, 600
Cocaine. See Drugs/Drug Abuse.
Codependence 127–128
Cognition 131–132
information-processing theory 329

Depth perception

alcohol dependence and abuse 25
aging 22
bipolar disorder 176
boredom 90
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
209
genetic inheritance 175
hallucinations 290
loss and grief 397
See also Melancholia.
Depth perception 77, 177
Descartes, René 178, 178 (ill.)
The Descent of Man 167
Desensitization 156, 179, 378
Determinism 179–180
Developmental delay 180–181
Developmental psychology 182–183,
520
adolescent behavior 225
Developmental reading disorder
181–182
Developmental stages, theories of
183–184
Dewey, John 184–185
educational psychology 206
Dexedrine 54
Dextroamphetimine 54
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) 186–187
Diencephalon 93, 110
Difference threshold 521
Differential psychology 187–188
Disability 188–189
legislation 31, 612
Disconnection aphasia 44
Discourse on Method 178
Discrimination. See Prejudice and discrimination.
Disintegrative psychosis 497
Displacement 168, 169
Dissociation/Dissociative disorders
189–190, 263, 519
Dissociative identity disorder 66,
190–192
Divergent thinking 158, 159, 192
Divorce 192–193
DNA 173, 193
Dollard, John 65
Double-blind study 193
Down syndrome 193–194, 422
Draw-a-person test 195
Dreams 195–196
nightmares 458
rapid eye movement (REM)
537–538
Drive reduction theory 196–197, 440
Drug therapy 199
Drugs/Drug abuse 197–199
hallucinogens 291
marijuana 402–403
Dugale, Richard 347
Dyscalcula 382
Dysfunctional family 199–200
Dysgraphia 382
694

Dyslexia 200–202, 382
Dysthymia 176

E
Ear
equilibrium sense 224
See also Hearing.
Eating disorders 203
anorexia 37–38
bulimia 101–102
Ebbinghaus, Hermann 203 (ill.),
203–204
forgetting curve 255
serial learning 576
Eccles, John Carew 204–207, 205 (ill.)
Echolalia 206
Education for All Handicapped Children Act (EHCA, PL 94-142) 612
Educational psychology 206–208, 520
EEG. See Electroencephalograph
(EEG).
Effector 208
Ego 208, 323
Elaborative rehearsal 542
Elderly
dementia 172
Electra complex 464
Electrical stimulation of the brain
(ESB) 208–209
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
209–210
Electroencephalograph (EEG) 95, 210
Elemente der Psychophysik 246
ELISA (enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay) 7
Elkind, David 210–212, 211 (ill.)
Ellis, Albert 128, 212 (ill.), 212–213
rational-emotive behavior therapy
538
Emotional attachment
autism 60
Emotional development 213–217
Emotional intelligence 217–218
Emotional transition 13
Emotions 19, 218–219
embarrassment 569
fear 245
grief 397–399
guilt 285, 568
hubris 568
pride 568
self-conscious emotions 567
shame 568
shyness 569
Emotive imagery 379
Empathy 219–220
client-centered therapy 125
Empiricism 220
Enactive mode 100
Encounter group 220–221
Endocrine glands 221, 308

Engineering psychology 45
English as a Second Language (ESL)
75
Environment 221–222
Environmental determinism 351
Epilepsy 223–224
surgical cure 485
Equilibrium sense 224
Erikson, Erik 13, 116, 224–226, 225
(ill.)
identity crisis 322
theory of child development 119,
225
Escape from Freedom 263
ESP 472
Essay Concerning Human Understanding 390
Essential needs 540
Ethics 226–228
Ethnic identity 228–229
Ethnocentrism 229
Ethology 161, 229–230
Hinde, Robert Aubrey 304
Lorenz, Konrad 394
Etiology 230–231
Etzioni, Amitai 28
Eugenics 108, 222, 231–232, 268
Ewing, John 26
Exhibitionism 471
Existential psychology 232–233
Expectations 318
Experimental design 234
Experimental group 234–235
Experimental neuroses 478
Experimental psychology 235–237,
520, 669
comparative psychology 141
physiological psychology 499
Explorations in Personality: A Clinical
Study of Fifty Men of College Age
442
Extinction 237, 478
Extrasensory perception 472
Extroversion 237, 238, 348
Eysenck, Hans 237, 238–239, 339
personality traits 237, 650

F
Familial retardation 240–241
Family 242–244
social competence 601
socialization 608
Family psychology 5
Family size 241
Family systems theory 91
Family therapy 241–242, 432, 526
Bowen, Murray 90
marriage counseling 404
Minuchin, Salvador 431
Fantasy 244
Fear 244–245

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Functional fixedness 264–265
Functionalism 265–266, 341

G
Galen 267 (ill.), 267–268
Gall, Franz Joseph 498
Galton, Francis 155, 268–269, 333
eugenics 231
twins 651
Gambling 269, 325
Gangs 269–272
Gardner, Howard 272–273, 334
theory of multiple intelligences 336
Gate theory of pain 468
Gender bias 273
Gender constancy 273–274
Gender identity 274–275, 302, 306,
619
gender constancy 273, 274
See also Transgender.
Gender identity disorder 275–276
General adaptation syndrome 276
Generalization 478
Genital stage 522
Genius 276–277
See also Giftedness.
Genotype 117
Gesell Development Schedules 116
Gesell, Arnold 116, 207, 277 (ill.),
277–278, 294
Gestalt principles of organization 278
Gestalt psychology 278–280, 360
Koffka, Kurt 357
Wertheimer, Max 666
Perls, Frederick S. 489
Gibson, Eleanor J. 280–281
Gibson, James Jerome 281
Giftedness 281–282
special education 614
Girls
gangs 271
puberty 12
Rett’s disorder 496
Glasser, William 540
Goddard, Henry 352
Grand mal seizures 223
Gratification 171
Grief. See Loss and grief.
Gross motor skills 282–284
Group therapy 284–285, 526
encounter groups 220
role playing/psychodrama 550
Gruber, Howard 157
Guilford, J. P. 154, 158, 159
Guilt 285–286
Gustation. See Taste.
Guthrie, Edwin Ray 286–286, 287
(ill.)

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

H
Haley, Jay 288
Halfway house 288–289
Hall, G. Stanley 115, 207, 289–290,
290 (ill.), 342
Hallucinations 290–291
Hallucinogens 291–293
Halo effect 293
Hand-eye coordination 283, 294-296
See also Motor skills.
Handedness 293–294
Harlow, Harry 51, 296–297
Harris, Elisha 346
Hartley, David 50
Head Start program 673
Head trauma 92
Health psychology 297
Hearing 297–298
frequency (auditory) 258
Hebb, Donald O. 298
Heider, Fritz 299–300
Heidigger, Martin 90
Heller’s syndrome 497
Helmholtz, Hermann von 300–301,
301 (ill.)
Helplessness, learned. See Learned
helplessness.
Hereditary Genius 268
Heredity 301–302
intelligence 337, 352
Hering-Breuer reflex 98
Heterosexuality 302–303
Heuristics 303
Hierarchy of motivation 314
Hierarchy of needs 20
Hilgard, Ernest R. 303–304
Hincks, Clarence M. 70
Hindbrain 110
Hinde, Robert A. 304–305
Hippocrates 642
Histrionic personality disorder 305
HIV 6
Holtzman inkblot technique 305
Homosexuality 306–307
conversion 346
Homosexuality in Perspective 407
Hooker, Evelyn 307–308
Hormones 221, 308–311
puberty 528
reproduction 310, 311
sex differences 577
Horney, Karen 231, 311–312, 312 (ill.)
Hostility 312
Hotlines
child abuse 112
Howes, Ethel Dench Puffer 529–530
Hull, Clark Leonard 312 (ill.),
312–313
Human Immunodeficiency Virus. See
HIV.
Human potential movement 220,
314–315, 407, 549
695

Human potential movement

See also Phobia.
Fechner, Gustave Theodor 204, 235,
245–246, 246 (ill.)
psychophysics 520
Female sexuality
birth 81
puberty 12
Feral children 246–247
Festinger, Leon 247–248
cognitive dissonance 132, 134
Fetal alcohol syndrome 26, 248–249
Field theory 386
Fight or flight response 8, 167
Figure-ground perception 249–250
Fine motor skills 250–252
First impressions. See Social perception.
Fixation 168, 169, 252
Fixed-action patterns 395
Flavell, John Hurley 252–253
Forebrain 110
hypothalamus 320
thalamus 643
Forensic psychology 45, 253–255
Forgetting curve 204, 255
Frames of Mind 272
Frank, Waldo David 256–257, 257
(ill.)
Frankl, Viktor E. 255 (ill.), 255–256
Free association 257–258
Free-recall learning 258
Frequency (auditory) 258–259
Frequency distribution 259
Freud, Anna 168, 259 (ill.), 259–260
play therapy 503
Freud, Sigmund 98, 260 (ill.),
260–261, 535
aggression 20
bisexuality 84
competition 142
consciousness 150
conversion hysteria 154
defense mechanisms 168
ego 208
etiology of psychological disorders
230
fixation 252
humor 318
id 323
instincts 332
Oedipus complex 326, 464
pleasure principle 504
preconscious 508
psychoanalysis 98, 257, 516
psychosexual stages of development
115, 117, 521
superego 637
unconscious 654
Friendship 261–262
Fromm, Erich 231, 262 (ill.), 262–263
Frustration-aggression hypothesis 21
Fugue 263–264
Functional autonomy 29
Functional disorder 264

Human Sexual Response

Maslow, Abraham 404
sensitivity training 573
Human Sexual Response 345, 406
Human sexuality
Kinsey scale 84
Klein Sexual Orientation Grid 84
Masters and Johnson study 344,
406–407
Humanistic psychology 313–314
May, Rollo 407
Hume, David 50, 315–317, 316 (ill.)
Humor 168, 170, 317–318
Hyperactivity 52
Hypnosis 97, 151, 318–320
Charcot, Jean Martin 111
Hilgard, Ernest R. 303
Mesmer, Franz Anton 424
Hypochondria 320
Hypothalamus 93, 221, 320
hormones 308
Hypothesis testing 320–321
Hysteria 111

I
I.Q. See Intelligence quotient. See also
Intelligence, Intelligence tests.
Iconic mode 100
Id 208, 323
Identification 168, 170
Identity/Identify formation 322–323
ethnicity and 228
Identity crisis 225, 322
Idiot savants. See Savant syndrome.
Imagination 323–324
daydreams 167
mental imagery 421
Imitation 324
Imprinting 92, 161, 324–325, 395
Impulse control disorders 325
kleptomania 356
pyromania 530
Inadequacy, feelings of. See Inferiority
complex.
Incest 326
See also Rape.
Independent variable 234, 236,
326–327
Indeterminism 179
Individuation 14
Inductive reasoning 168, 327, 330
Industrial psychology 327, 520
Infancy 327–328
See also Infants.
Infant attachment 23
Infant development
Bayley, Nancy 68
Infants 117
Apgar score 43
assessment tests 96, 68
bonding 327
emotional development 213
696

empathy 214
hand-eye coordination 294
language development 368
motor skills 250, 282
parent-child relationships 91, 473
separation anxiety 574
temperaments 328
Inferiority complex 11, 328–329
Information-processing theory 329
Inhelder, Bärbel 330, 501
Inkblot test 49, 305
Insanity defense 330–332
Insomnia 594
Instinct theory 440
Instincts 332, 408
Institute for Family Studies and Treatment 6
Institutionalization 332–333
Instrumental behavior 333
Instrumental conditioning. See Operant
conditioning.
Intelligence 333–335
children 118
Gardner, Howard Earl 272
genius 276
giftedness 281
heredity 268, 352
measurement of 335
mental age 418
mental retardation 421
race and intelligence 533
Intelligence quotient 335–337
Intelligence tests 76, 467, 671
Bellevue-Wechsler Scale 663
children 424
culture-fair tests 165
Kohs block test 359
mental ability 204
Merrill-Palmer scales of mental
tests 424
non-verbal 626
Otis Group Intelligence Scale 467
standard progressive matrices
(SPM) 626
Stanford-Binet Intelligence Scale
76, 627
Wechsler Intelligence Scale 663, 664
Intelligence, artificial 47
Interdisciplinary treatment 337–338
Interest inventory 338–339
Intermittent explosive disorder 325, 339
Internal-External Locus of Control
Scale (I-E) 392
Interpersonal attraction 57
Interpersonal relationships, psychology
of. See Social psychology.
The Interpretation of Dreams 260, 516
Introjection 168, 170
Introversion 238, 339–340, 348
shyness 590
IQ. See Intelligence quotient. See also
Intelligence, Intelligence tests.
Isolation 168, 170
Itard, Jean-Marc-Gaspard 246

J
Jacklin, Carol Nagy 401
Jahoda, Marie 5
James, William 341 (ill.), 341–342,
545
educational psychology 206
functionalism 150, 265
human potential movement 314
theory of emotion 218
James-Lange theory of emotion 218,
342
Janet, Pierre Marie Félix 342–343, 343
(ill.)
Janov, Arthur 510
Jealousy 343
sibling rivalry 79
Jensen, Arthur R. 343–344, 344 (ill.)
Johnson, Virginia E. 344–346, 406
Judd, Charles Hubbard 207
Jukes family 346–347
Jung, Carl 347 (ill.), 347–348
archetypes 46, 348
collective unconsciousness 151
etiology of psychological disorders
231
introversion 339
Just noticeable difference 348–349,
521
Juvenile delinquency 349–350

K
Kagan, Jerome 351–352
Kallen, Horace 4
Kallikak family 352–353
Kanner, Leo 60
Kelly, George Alexander 56, 353–354
Kennell, John 86
Kierkegaard, Soren 233
Kinesthetic sense 354
Kinsey Report. See Kinsey, Alfred
Charles.
Kinsey, Alfred Charles 84, 302, 305,
355–356
Klaus, Marshall 86
Klein Sexual Orientation Grid 84
Klein, Fritz 84
Klein, Melanie 91
Kleptomania 325, 356
Knowledge, theory of 391
Koffka, Kurt 356–358, 357 (ill.), 360
Gestalt psychology 279
Kohlberg, Lawrence 273, 358–359
stages of moral development 116,
436
Köhler, Wolfgang 357, 359–361, 360
(ill.)
Gestalt psychology 279
Kohs block test 359
Kraepelin, Emil 361–362

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Labor. See Birth.
Ladd-Franklin, Christine 363 (ill.),
363–364
Laing, Ronald David 364–365
Lamaze, Fernand 83
Lange, C. G. 218
Language
aphasia 43
bilingual education 74
cognition 131
communication skills 139
disorders 139
Language acquisition
children 118
cognition 131
inherent ability 120
Language delay 365–367
Language development 368–376
Language disorder 376–377
specific language impairment (SLI)
615
Lashley, Karl Spencer 377
Lateralization 385
Law of effect 72, 378, 644
Law of exercise 72, 378, 644
Lazarus, Arnold Allan 378
Leadership 379–380
Learned helplessness 175, 258,
380–381
Learning 433
concept formation 143
conditioning 145
forgetting curve 255
free-recall 258
paired-associate learning 469
programmed learning 511
Learning curve 381–382
See also Forgetting curve.
Learning disability 382–384
race 613
testing 73
Learning theory 287, 384–385
Learning, serial 576
Learning-to-learn 385
Left-brain hemisphere 385–386
Left-handed. See Handedness.
Legal psychology. See Forensic psychology.
Lewin, Kurt 314, 386–387
sensitivity training 573
Libido 387
Lie detection 387–389
Light
depression 176
Listening, reflective. See Reflective listening.
Lithium 79
Localization (brain function) 389
Localization (sensory) 389
Locke, John 50, 390–392, 391 (ill.)
tabula rasa theory of childhood 117

M
Maccoby, Eleanor Emmons 401–402
Magnesium pemoline 54
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 95
Magnetoencephalography (MEG) 95
Maintenance rehearsal 542
Malinowski, Bronislaw 162
Mania 176, 402
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT)
209
hallucinations 290
Manic depression. See Bipolar disorder.
Marijuana 292, 402–403
Marketing 152
Marriage counseling 404
Maslow, Abraham 20, 313, 314,
404–406, 405 (ill.), 566 (ill.)
self-actualization 565
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs 405, 441
Masochism 471
Masters, William 344, 406 (ill.),
406–407
Masturbation 15
May, Rollo 233, 314, 407–408
power 507
Mayer, John 217
McDougall, William 408–410, 409
(ill.)
McGrath, Elizabeth 227
Mead, Margaret 410–411
Mean 411–412
Measurement 412
mean 411
median 412
mode 433
norm 460
normal distribution 459
rating scale 538
Media psychology 413–414
Median 412
Mediation
peer mediation 482
Medical psychology 297
Meditations on First Philosophy 178
Medulla 110
Meehl, Paul J. 414–415
MEG. See Magnetoencephalography
(MEG).

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Melancholia 415
The Melting Pot 4
Memory 131, 415–418
cathexis 106
Ebbinghaus, Hermann 203
false memories 417
free-recall learning 258
long-term memory 573
recovered memories 417
rehearsal 542
savant syndrome 557
semantic memory 573
serial learning 576
serial position function 576
stages of 416
techniques for improving 415, 433
word association test 669
Memory loss 31
Mental age 334, 335, 418
Mental disorders, classification of 186
Mental health 418–419
Mental hospitals 419
Mental hygiene movement 70, 427
Mental illness 419–421
causes 422
neurological classification of 361
psychosis 523
psychotherapy 525
treatment 420, 513, 514
types of 419, 420
See also Mental health.
Mental imagery 324, 330, 379, 421
Mental retardation 421–424
autism 61
familial retardation 240
fetal alcohol syndrome 248
language delay 367
Mental sets 100
Merrill-Palmer scales of mental tests
424
Mesencephalon 110
Mesmer, Franz Anton 424–426, 425
(ill.)
Metapsychology 426
Methylphenidate 54
Meyer, Adolf 426 (ill.), 426–427
Midbrain 110
Middle years 427–428
Midlife. See Middle years.
Miescher, Friedrich 173
Milgram, Stanley 428–429, 605
Milgram’s obedience experiment 428
Military psychology 429–430
Mill, James 50
Mill, John Stuart 50
Miller, Neal 65
Minimal brain dysfunction 430–431
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory 431, 495
Minuchin, Salvador 242, 431–432
Mischel, Walter 606
MMPI. See Minnesota Multiphasic
Personality Inventory.
Mnemonic strategies 433
697

Mnemonic strategies

L

Locus of control 58, 392–393
Logical thinking 393–394
Logotherapy 255
Longitudinal study 163, 394
Lorenz, Konrad 21, 91, 394–397, 395
(ill.)
imprinting 161
Loss and grief 397–399
LSD 292
Luria, Aleksandr Romanovich
399–400

Mode

Mode 433
Modeling 324, 433–434
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitors
depression 176
Monocular depth cue 177
Montessori schools 435
Montessori, Maria 434–435, 435 (ill.)
Mood 436
Mood disorders 519
Moral development 436–439
moral balance model 438
stages of 116, 358, 437
Moreno, Jacob 550
Morgan, Christiana Drummond 439,
440
Morris, Desmond 21
Mother-child bonding 91
Motivation 440–441
Motivation, hierarchy of 314
Motivation, unconscious 654
Motor skills
fine motor skills 250
gross motor skills 282
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI).
Multiculturalism 4
Multimodal therapy 378
Multiple personality. See Dissociative
identity disorder.
Murray, Henry Alexander, Jr. 441–443
Mushrooms
hallucinogens 291
Music therapy 443–444
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 444–445

N
The Naked Ape 21
Narcissism 446–447
Narcolepsy 447, 594
Narcotic drugs 447–448
National Association of School Psychologists 448
National Committee for Mental Hygiene 70
National Institute of Mental Health
449
Native language magnet theory 618
Natural childbirth 83
Natural selection. See Darwin, Charles.
The Nature of Prejudice 29
Nature-nurture controversy 118, 221,
346–347, 353–353, 449–451
Naumburg, Margaret 451
Near-death experience 451–452
Necrophilia. See Paraphilia.
Negativism 452
Neglect 112
Negotiation 148
conflict resolution 148
Neobehaviorism 312
Neocortex 452
698

Neonatal Behavioral Assessment Scale
(NBAS) 96
Nerve cell. See Neuron.
Nerve impulse
measurement of 301
response to 208
Nerves 453
stimulus of 7
Nervous system 453–454
autonomic 61
Neuron 173, 455, 456 (ill.)
neurotransmitter 458
communication 204
synapse 638
Neurosis 238, 455–458
Neurotic disorders 457
Neurotransmitter 458
Nicotine 629
Night terrors 459
Nightmares 458
Noise, harmful levels of 298
Non-directive therapy. See Client-centered therapy.
Norm 460
Normal 460
Normal distribution 459–460
Nuclear family. See Family.

O
Obedience 428
Obedience to authority: an experimental view. 429
Obesity 9, 461–462
Objective test. See Personality inventory.
Observational assessment 49
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
462–463
Tourette syndrome 647
Obsessive-compulsive disorders 1
Occupational therapists 463–464
Oedipus complex 274, 326, 464, 517,
522
Olfaction. See Smell.
On Aggression 21
On the Origin of Species by Means of
Natural Selection 166
Operant conditioning 71, 145,
464–465
programmed learning 511
reinforcement 544
shaping 588
Skinner, B. F. 592
Oppositional-defiant disorder 466
Organic disorder 466
Organization, Gestalt principles of 278
Organizational psychology 327
Orgastic potency 543
Otis Group Intelligence Scale 467
Otis, Arthur 466–467
Overachiever 467

Overactive children. See Attention
deficit/hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD).

P
Pain 468–469
Paired-associate learning 469
Pancreas
hormones 310
Panic/Panic disorders 469–470
Paranoia 470–471
Paraphilia 471
Parapsychology 472–473
Parathyroid glands 309
Parent-child relationships 473–477
Parkinson’s disease 477
Parturition. See Birth.
Passive aggression 35
Passive-aggressive personality 478
Pattern and Growth in Personality 29
Pavlov, Ivan 71, 478–479, 479 (ill.)
behavioral etiology 231
conditioning 124, 144, 145
Pearson Product-Moment Correlation
155
Pearson, Karl 155
Pedophilia 114, 471, 479–481
Peer acceptance 481–482
Peer mediation 482–484
Peer pressure 485
drugs/drug abuse 293
Penfield, Wilder Graves 485–487, 486
(ill.)
People skills. See Emotional intelligence. See also Social competence.
Perception 318, 487–488
visual perception 281
Perfectionism 488–489
Peripheral nervous system 454
Perls, Frederick S. 489–490
Persona 46
Personal construct theory of personality
353
Personal fable 211
Personality 490–492
assessment of. See Personality
tests.
authoritarian 59
avoidant 63
behavioral theory of 491
development of. See Personality development.
effect of culture on 410
ego 323
extroversion 237
id 323
integrated theory of personality 442
introversion 339
narcissism 446
passive-aggressive 478
personal construct theory 353

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

hormones 309
Placebo effect 502
Play 503–504
Play therapy 503
Pleasure principle 504–505
Pluralistic ignorance 103
PMS. See Premenstrual syndrome
(PMS).
Polygraph. See Lie detection.
Pornography 505
Positive reinforcement, systematic 72
Positron emission tomography (PET)
95
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
430, 505–507
See also Combat neurosis.
Postman, Leo 100
mental sets 133
Power 507
Preconscious 507–508
Pregnancy, termination of. See Abortion.
Prejudice
Allport, Gordon Willard 29
Prejudice and discrimination 508–509
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)
509–510
Primal therapy 510–511
Principles of Gestalt Psychology 358
Principles of Philosophy 178
The Principles of Psychology 341
Problem solving 303
Programmed learning 511–512
Projection 168, 169
Projective techniques 512–513
Rorschach technique 512, 550–551
thematic apperception test 19, 49,
439, 512, 644
Prosocial behavior 39
Psyche 513
Psychedelics. See Hallucinogens.
Psychiatry/Psychiatrist 501, 513–514
Psychoactive drugs 514–516
Psychoanalysis 257, 260, 311,
516–517, 525
children 259
Psychoanalytic theory
Breuer, Josef 97
id 323
Reich, Wilhelm 543
Psychobiology 426
Psychodrama. See Role playing/Psychodrama.
Psychodynamic theory of personality
491
Psychokinesis 472, 473
Psycholinguistics 120, 134
Psychological Abstracts 517–518
Psychological disorder 518–519
study of root causes of 230
Psychology. See Abnormal psychology, Applied psychology, Child psychology, Clinical psychology, Cognitive psychology, Consumer psycholo-

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

gy, Counseling psychology, Crosscultural psychology, Developmental
psychology, Differential psychology,
Educational psychology, Engineering
psychology, Existential psychology,
Experimental psychology, Family
psychology, Forensic psychology,
Gestalt psychology, Health psychology, Humanistic psychology, Industrial
psychology, Media psychology, Military psychology, Organizational psychology, Philosophical psychology,
Physiological psychology, Rehabilitation psychology, School psychology,
Social psychology, Sports psychology.
The Psychology of Beauty 529
The Psychology of Sex Differences 401
Psychology/Psychologist 519–520
Psychometrics 33
The Psychopathology of Everyday Life
516
Psychopathy. See Antisocial personality disorder.
Psychophysics 520–521
Fechner, Gustave Theodor 245
Psychophysiology
biofeedback 77
Psychosexual stages 521–523
Psychosis 238, 523–524
Psychosomatic disorders 524–525
Psychostimulants 629
Psychosurgery 525
Psychotherapy 525–526, 535
Psychotic disorders 519, 526–527
Puberty 11, 527–529
sexuality 586
Puffer, Ethel Dench 529–530
Punishment 530
Pyromania 325, 530

Q
Qualitative methods 531–532

R
Race and intelligence 533–534
Racism 534–535
See also Prejudice and discrimination.
Radical behaviorism 179
Rank, Otto 535, 536
Rape 536–537
Rapid eye movement (REM) 537–538
Rating scale 538
699

Rating scale

phenomenological theory of 491
psychoanalysis 516
psychodynamic theory of 491
sexual orientation 306
social learning theory 552, 606
superego 323
trait theory of 491
type A personality 652
type theory of 490
Personality assessment. See Personality tests.
Personality constructs 56
Personality development 492–494
children 118
effect of environment on 449
nature-nurture controversy 449
Personality disorders 494–495
dependent personality disorder 174
histrionic personality disorder 305
Personality inventory. See Personality
tests.
Personality tests 49, 108, 495–496
Minnesota Multiphasic Personality
Inventory 431
Myers-Briggs Type Indicator 444
projective techniques 512
Rorschach test 550
Rosenzweig picture frustration
study 552
sixteen personality factor questionnaire (16PF) 108
thematic apperception test (TAT)
439, 512, 644
Personality theory 28
Personality type
interpersonal attraction 58
Personality: A Psychological Interpretation 29
Personology 441, 442
Pervasive developmental disorder
(PDD) 496–497
PET. See Positron emission tomography (PET).
Petit mal seizures 223
Phallic stage 497
Phenomenological theory of personality 491
Phenotype 117
Philosophical psychology 497–498
Philosophy of mitigated skepticism
315
Phobia 1, 498
School phobia/School refusal 561
Phrenology 498–499
Physiological psychology 498–500
Piaget, Jean 49, 330, 500 (ill.),
500–501
child development theory 116, 117,
119, 129
child psychology 500
developmental stages of play 503
logical thinking 393
Pinel, Philippe 501–502
Pituitary gland

Rational-emotive behavior therapy

Rational-emotive behavior therapy
128, 212, 538–539
Rationalization 168, 170
Raven’s Progressive Matrices 626
Reaction formation 168, 169
Reaction time 539
Readiness test 539
Reading disorders
developmental reading disorder 181
Reality therapy 539–540
Reasoning, deductive 168
Reasoning, inductive 168, 327
Recapitulation 290
Reflective listening 540–541
Reflexes 541
Regression 168, 169
Rehabilitation 541–542
Rehabilitation psychology 297
Rehearsal 542–543
Reich, Wilhelm 543–544
Reinforcement 478, 544–545
Religion and psychology 545–546
Repetitive self-mutilation 325
Repression 168, 169
Research methodology 546–547
Rett’s disorder 496
Revision der Hauptpunkte der Psychophysik 246
Ribonucleic acid (RNA) 173, 547–548
Right-brain hemisphere 548–549
Right-handed. See Handedness.
Ritalin 54, 630
Ritual abuse 114, 555
RNA 173
Rogers, Carl 313, 314, 549–550
client-centered therapy 124, 156
self-actualization 565
Role playing/psychodrama 550
Romantic attraction 58
Rorschach technique 512, 550–551
Rosenzweig picture frustration study
552
Rotter, Julian B. 552–553, 606
locus of control 392
Rush, Benjamin 553–554, 554 (ill.)

S
Sadomasochism 471
Salovey, Peter 217
Satanic ritual abuse 555
Satir, Virginia M. 555–556
SATs. See Scholastic Assessment Test.
Savant syndrome 556–557
Scapegoating 557–558
Schachter-Singer theory of emotion
218
Schizophrenia 1, 558–560
hallucinations 290
Laing, Ronald David 364
Shakow, David 587
Schizotypal personality disorder 494
700

Scholastic Assessment Test 4, 560–561
School phobia/School refusal 561–562
School psychology 520, 562
Scientific method 562–563
Sears, Robert 65
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) 176
Security objects 563–565
Segregation 121
Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors
(SSRIs) 38, 39, 176
Self 46, 47
The Self and Its Brain 178
Self-actualization 313, 405, 565–566
Self-concept 566–567
Self-conscious emotions 567–570
Self-esteem 313, 570–571
attitude 57
eating disorders 203
ethnic identity 228
Self-fulfilling prophecy 571–572
Self-help groups 572–573
Self-mutilation, repetitive 325
Self-perception theory 57
Self-socialization 402
Semantic memory 573
Senses
hearing 297–298
smell 597
taste 639–640
testing of 3
touch 646
vision 658
Sensitivity training 220, 573–574
Sensory deprivation 574
Separation anxiety 214, 574–576
school phobia/school refusal 561
Serial learning 576
Serial position function 576–577
Sex differences 302, 306, 577–578
Sex roles 302, 306, 578–581
Sex therapies 581–582
Sexism. See Gender.
Sexual abuse 582–584
satanic ritual abuse 555
Sexual attraction
bisexuality 302
heterosexuality 302
homosexuality 303, 306
Sexual behavior
Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) 7
adolescence 15
Sexual Behavior in the Human Male
302, 356
Sexual deviations 584
Sexual dysfunction 584–585
Sexual dysfunction, treatment for. See
Sex therapies.
Sexual orientation 306
Sexuality 585–586
deviant 471
See also Human sexuality.
Shadow 46, 47
Shakow, David 587–588

Shaping 588
Sheldon, William Herbert 588–589
Shell shock. See Combat neurosis.
Sherif, Muzafer 149
Shinn, Milicent W. 589
Shyness 589–590
Sibling rivalry 79
Sight. See Vision.
Signal detection theory 521, 590–591
Significance level 591–592
Similarity 50
Simon, Herbert 329
Simon, Paul-Max 48
Simon, Theodore 76, 334
Sixteen Personality Factor questionnaire (16PF) 108
Skepticism, mitigated 315, 316
Skinner Box 71, 592
Skinner, B. F. 71, 592 (ill.), 592–593
behavioral etiology 231
behaviorism 73
operant conditioning 146, 465
programmed learning 511
radical behaviorism 179
Sleep 537, 593–594
night terrors 459
nightmares 458
REM 151
Sleep disorders 594–596
narcolepsy 447
Sleepwalking. See Somnambulism.
Smell 597
Social competence 597–604
Social development
children 118
Social influence 604–605
Social Learning and Imitation 65
Social learning theory 21, 606
Social marketing 56
Social perception 606–607
Social psychology 607
Social skills. See Social competence.
Social transition 14
Socialization 607–609
Society of Individual Psychology 11
Sociobiology 609–610
Sociocentrism 229
Sociocultural retardation. See Familial
retardation.
Sociopathy. See Antisocial personality
disorder.
Somatic effectors 208
Somatoform disorders 518
Somnambulism 610
Spearman, Charles Edward 334,
610–611, 611 (ill.)
Special education 611–615
Specific language impairment (SLI)
615–616
Speech. See Language, Language development.
Speech-language pathology 616–617
Speech perception 617–619

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

T
Tardieu, Ambrose 48
Taste 639–640
Taylor Manifest Anxiety Scale (MAS)
619
TCAs. See Tricyclic antidepressants
(TCAs).
Tectum 110
Tegmentum 110
Television and aggression 640–641
Temperament 237, 328, 351, 641–642
Terman, Lewis 76, 207, 642–643, 643
(ill.)

intelligence tests 129, 643
The Territorial Imperative 21
Test anxiety 643
Thalamus 93, 643–644
Thanatos 20
Thematic Apperception Test 19, 49,
439, 512, 644
Theories of learning. 287
Theory of cognitive growth 134
Theory of knowledge 391
Theory of multiple intelligences 272,
277
Theory of three-color vision 300
Thorndike, Edward L. 72, 207,
644–645, 645 (ill.)
Thought, symbolic modes of 100
Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality
516
Tolman, Edward Chance 645–646, 646
(ill.)
Tongue 639 (ill.)
Touch 646–647
Tourette syndrome 647–649
Trait theory of personality 491
Traits 34, 649–650
Transcendental Meditation (TM) 151
Transference 650
Transgender 650–651
See also Gender identity disorder.
Transitional Bilingual Education (TBE)
75
Transsexualism. See Gender identity
disorder, Transgender.
The Trauma of Birth 535
Trichotillomania 325
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) 38,
39, 176
Twelve-step programs 572
Twins 651–652
Type A personality 652–653
Type theory of personality 490

U
Unconditional positive regard 125
Unconditioned reflex 478
Unconditioned stimulus 478
Unconscious 654
Unconscious motivation 654–655
Unconsciousness, profound 137
Underachiever 655
The Unity of the Family 5

V
Varieties of Religious Experience 545
Vascular dementia 172
Vicarious learning 65
Vienna Psychoanalytic Society 10, 347

GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PSYCHOLOGY, 2ND EDITION

Violence 656–658
modeling 434
Vision 658–659
binocular depth cues 77, 177
color 137
figure-ground perception 249
theory of three-color vision 300
visual perception 281
Visual angle 659
Vocational Aptitude Test 659–660
Voyeurism. See Paraphilia.

W
Walden School 451
Wallas, Graham 157
Washburn, Margaret Floy 661 (ill.),
661–662
Watson, James D. 173
Watson, John B. 72, 117, 662–663,
663 (ill.)
behaviorism 150
Weber fractions 349
Wechsler Intelligence Scales 335,
664–665
Wechsler, David 335, 663–664
Werkes, Robert 671
Wernicke, Carl 44, 294, 665–666
Wernicke’s area 44, 44 (ill.), 93, 666
Wertheimer, Max 357, 360, 666–668,
667 (ill.)
Gestalt psychology 279
Wilkins, Maurice 173
Wilson, Edward O. 609
Withdrawal behavior 668
Withdrawal symptoms 9
Wolpe, Joseph 156, 668–669
Women
premenstrual syndrome (PMS) 509
Word association test 669
Wundt, Wilhelm Max 107, 150, 236,
669–670, 670 (ill.)
determinism 179
memory 203

Y
Yerkes, Robert 671 (ill.), 671–672
Yerkes-Dodson Law 671
Young-Helmholtz theory 300

Z
Zangwill, Israel 4
Zigler, Edward F. 673–674
Zoophilia. See Paraphilia.
701

Zoophilia

Speech therapy. See Speech-language
pathology.
Spence, Janet Taylor 619–620
Spence, Kenneth W. 65, 620–621
Spinal cord 109
Split-brain technique 621–622
Spock, Benjamin 622–624, 623 (ill.)
Sports psychology 624–626
Spurzheim, Johann 499
SSRIs. See Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
Standard progressive matrices (SPM)
626
Standardized test 626–627
Stanford-Binet intelligence scales 76,
129, 627, 671
Statistics in psychology 627–628
Stereotype 628
Sternberg, Robert 334, 628–629
Stimulant drugs 629–631
Strange Situation test 24, 51, 574,
632–633
Stranger anxiety 631–632
Stress 99, 276, 633–634
Stroke 92
Strong-Campbell Interest Inventory
338
Structural family therapy 242
Studies on Hysteria 260
Stuttering. See Speech-language
pathology.
Sublimation 168, 170
Subliminal influence 634
Substance abuse or dependence
addiction 8
bipolar disorder 79
codependence 127
Suicide/Suicidal behavior 634–636
Sullivan, Harry Stack 636–637
Superego 208, 323, 637
Superstition 637–638
Suppression 168, 169
Survival
adaptation and 8
Symbolic mode 100
Synapse 638
Systematic positive reinforcement 72

